Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Welcome and thank you for being here today, my name is Moderator I am a researcher here at Exeter university department of geography and I have been working in this travel behaviour project for one and a half years now and we have this survey you have been participating before and now we are having a set of focus groups and want to hear about peoples views and opinions about certain travel or transport related measures and if you can think of some things. I will go through my list and ask you a couple of questions and feel free to say whatever you want. First thing I want to ask you is just say your first name and anything you want to add, your, what you are currently doing or if you don’t, just your first name would be ok. Starting on my left.
Thomas: Yes, I’m Thomas and I’m retired. I previously worked for a university.
Moderator: Oh ok.
Gill: Thank you. My name is Gill, I also live on the edge of Exeter, on the east side of Exeter. I am retired and I don’t drive, and so I mainly use public transport, buses, trains etc, but I also like walking to get from A to B healthily.
Moderator: Ok. Thank you very much. You know that we are talking about travel behaviour and that includes daily travel, as you said how to move from A to B, but we also want to include holiday travel if you can think about that, and my first question for you is a very general one and just make up your mind and answer whatever you want. Do you feel that we need to change the way we travel today in general? Who wants to start?
Thomas: Well in general I would have thought travel less, I mean which is probably related to how I feel about the environment and use of resources and so on, but I think people travel far too much to see things that they could actually experience more locally, it’s a general feeling.
Moderator: Ok and you?
Gill: I would say, when you say do we need to change the way we travel, are we, are you perhaps asking should we perhaps not go by transport, should we do more on foot?
Moderator: That’s, that’s one way of changing it, yes of course. I mean travelling less is probably an option to change, but the way we travel also includes different means of transport and maybe you will be trying to, maybe distances travelled. So these are all options that would be a changed way of travelling, but not only when it comes to only the travel, if you can think about daily travel.
Gill: Don’t really have any thoughts I’m afraid I’m sorry.
Moderator: No problem
Gill: No
Thomas: I mean on daily travel I mean I think people actually could walk more than they do, I have no idea how you encourage people to do that, well accept making alternatives very expensive, they would walk because they can’t afford to get anything else. I mean I don’t know I suppose you could use taxis, things like that.
Gill: Yes expensive when I can get free travel!
Thomas: That’s right. But for people who are working within the city I’m quite sure some of them could easily walk to work. I mean I live on the opposite side of the city to Exeter, to the university and so it’s about three and a half miles which is probably too much to walk for a days work but a lot of other people live within a mile of the centre. I mean we were referring to students earlier on and I quite often see students, I mean for instance picking up the bus in the centre of Exeter, where as it really is not far to walk up to the university, from when I was working here I mean I regularly did it, I went into the city at lunch time I walked and didn’t catch a bus. That I think could change, but that means people have got to be willing to walk.
Moderator: That’s right.
Thomas: I mean an interesting effect of the free bus passes, I mean having reached an age where I get a free bus pass, previously I regularly walked into Exeter from where I live, which is about a couple of miles. Now I’ve got a free bus pass I’ll use the bus! So I’ve actually lost some of the exercise!
Moderator: Okay, so that replaces the walking, or substitutes?
Thomas: That’s right, yes.
Moderator: In your case.
Thomas: Yes.
Moderator: Let me add something, you said there could be people that should be encouraged to change the way they travel, can you think of some reasons that could be there for changing travel behaviour and why should people change? Maybe starting with you.
Thomas: Well, again I’m thinking in terms of shorter distances within the city, then I mean it goes along with our aims to encourage people to become fitter and more active. And it benefits them that way, and it saves them money as well. So it’s almost a win, win, but people still have to have to feel that they want to do that, or they’re willing to do it. I mean I think many would argue well they just haven’t got time, because if you are walking it generally takes a bit longer, not a lot longer actually, but! Depending on the traffic. 
Gill: Yes.
Moderator: What do you think of maybe other reasons for changing peoples travel behaviour?
Gill: To change travel behaviour?
Moderator: Yes.
Gill: One thing that I often think about is all the children that go in their parent’s car to school; I do think that sometimes the parents then drive on to their work, their place of work especially if it’s a mum. Perhaps if it’s a long way from the school more buses could be provided so that one bus could take lots of children, rather than lots of parents taking lots of children. That’s one thing I think should be looked at and maybe changed. I don’t think there’s anything else I can add to what Mike’s already said. Yes.
Thomas: I mean, that’s maybe concentrating on local travelling really. As you say you are also involved in holiday travelling. I think quite often there, people might be willing to travel somewhere by coach, train, whatever, but often find they need personal transport when they get there. It’s some thing we may touch on, as I’ve mentioned, walking is one of our main activities and often to get to where you are going to start a walk, you can only do with a private car. And as I said, maybe we will touch on that later but that also applies if people go on holiday, quite often it will depending on where they are, and I guess the way to encourage that is by providing good information on what transport is available to wherever they are going, I mean I think information about transport could probably be improved. I mean something I’ve been using a lot recently is walking around London, there is a circular route that goes all round London and which links with public transport and this was one of the ideas of it. And they, Transport for London has a really excellent internet site in which you can say where you want to start, where you want to end, and it will give you all the options for transport you can use. I think that could be a good approach. I think could encourage people to move to public transport. And there are situations like that where you are going to finish at a different point from where you started, then a car is no good because you know you’ve got to get back to where the car was, so I mean I think there could be attractions there.
Moderator: Thank you. To give you some ideas, what do you think about reasons like, let’s say environmental reasons or climate change, for changes in travel behaviour, is it something that is an issue for you?
Gill: Which was the question on the questionnaire. It doesn’t actually, I feel completely neutral about it. Simply because you hear so many conflicting suggestions and you know, sort of ideas which don’t add up, somebody else says oh that’s wrong, and you know don’t believe that. My son actually did an Open University course on alternative energy, which entailed the environment and lots of other things, and he completely convinced me for a year that, oh gosh, yes it was all going to happen, then it wasn’t going to happen. But when he’d actually graduated, he got a 1:2 so he didn’t do too bad, he said, well Mum really it’s all hearsay, you don’t really have to take it all so much for granted! And so I stopped flinging it back at him and thought yes, he’s probably right! So that’s my view, I’m neutral!
Moderator: Thank you.
Thomas: But in general I mean I just don’t think people are going to change their transport habits, or any other habits actually. On the basis of what’s happening to the planet, because it doesn’t, it’s not something that’s going to happen immediately, and you know even now the Government says well, if we don’t do anything in 20 – 30 years time, it’s going to be in a really bad state and people I don’t think are willing to make changes now for what might happen in 30 years time. Which as you say may not happen at all!
Gill: If they do, yes!
Thomas: Which makes it even worse. But even if they did I mean if it was 50 years, people know they are not going to be alive then.
Gill: Exactly yes. 
Thomas: Are they going to worry. And I think you have this whole problem of if I go, if I fly to go on holiday somewhere, is that worse than somebody who keeps driving somewhere all the time. An attitude weighing up between individuals is very difficult. 
Moderator: Thank you. I mean some people in previous meetings mentioned things like, congestion problems, that they need something to be done, or noise or, fumes in the local area, that need to be reduced, or improving quality of life in general, and things like that. But coming back to climate change, the British Government announced that they want to reduce the carbon emissions by 80% until 2050 I think. And in view of that, what is your view on transport policy, or do you think that it is reflected, or your general views on what policies, transport related policies.
Thomas: I think it’s totally confused actually, I mean I don’t think the Government has a consistent policy, particularly going through the economic situation we are, where on one hand the Government wants more and more cars to be sold, and on the other hand they are saying they want people to use public transport, not cars. I mean I think I sympathise with them a bit because you almost can’t win in some of these arguments, because it is so interrelated. It’s not a simple resolution! But in terms of congestion, I mean, yes I think some of the things that are being done, or seem to have had some effect in places like London, Exeter I’m not so sure about!
Gill: They did do something in Heavytree didn’t they a couple of years ago. They did a survey and that was to do also with the pollution of the air as well as congestion, the traffic that was continually going through Heavytree, and I think that something was done about it because it was really, really high, with regard to the pollution, and that sort of thing.
Thomas: Yes I think they placed restrictions on heavy traffic, going through, lorries going through. But again it is interesting, having been using the buses quite a bit in London recently, is just how well those are used by the people in London, I mean quite clearly in comparison with Exeter, I mean they have, they are using the buses presumably because congestion is so bad, it is so expensive to park, and we find it, the use of buses so much greater than in this area. Which I think are often used mainly by people who haven’t got cars or can’t afford it, or, but even then, I mean bus fares I think are quite high. 
Gill: Here in Exeter?
Thomas: Yes I mean, now I have a bus pass, but you begin to feel a bit guilty when you see people paying quite a fair bit of money on fares. And again the policies in London, may have encouraged people to move to buses because they probably slightly do subsidise it quite a bit, and certainly the fares are lower than in an area like this. 
Gill: Even the Underground is free for people over 60 or whatever.
Thomas: But even people who are using, I mean we’ve used the Oyster card system, and you get a reduction, and you can travel from one side of London to the other for £2 or £3..
Gill: Half the price or something isn’t it if you use your Oyster card.
Thomas: That’s right. So I’m quite impressed in many ways what they are doing in London. I mean the congestion charge I really don’t know enough about how successful, I get the impression it’s been successful, which is a bit surprising I think, because you know the amounts involved I mean are not that great, I would have thought a lot of people are driving because of their work, so that would just be included in the cost of that enterprise whatever it was. But it seems to… 
Gill: Do we know, sorry Thomas.
Thomas: No, I was going to ask you whether you had any thoughts as to what else you could do in Exeter, I mean you mentioned Heavytree, I mean Heavytree Road is just continuous traffic, that never stops, but I don’t know what you can do about it. I mean where you’ve got a city like Exeter which had 2 main roads that met in the city, apart from making really enormous changes, pulling properties down and doing fundamental changes it’s hard to see.
Gill: It’s hard to see. Do we know for instance, since they’ve pedestrianised most of the High Street now, not just the High Street the Main Road that goes through, do we know whether that’s made a lot of difference with regard to congestion or whatever. 
Thomas: I think it’s difficult to see from my point of view.
Gill: Yes, because that’s one of the ways that they are trying to stop the congestion isn’t it, by pedestrianising or one way or whatever, you know.
Moderator: To be honest we will come to some of these measures a little bit later. I am not asking particularly to whole list of points, and about your opinion on what they are trying there to change something. But that will be the next point I want, maybe one more question, it’s a little bit, some of the people have problems with that but, try to imagine, an ideal world travel wise, you know. Maybe I heard somebody mention yesterday that buses should be free then, and I don’t know walking should be easier, or cycling facilities should be much more improved, so if you can think of an ideal world and if you want to change your own travel behaviour how would you like to travel in this ideal world? Would you still use the same means of transport, would you maybe use different things? I mean it depends on many factors; there are always little bits that are complicated for people I think, but..
Thomas: Well in an ideal world, I mean I would certainly like to see them separated into different means of transport, I mean pedestrians and cyclists. I was recently in a city where there is a large cycling population, and that was very interesting because I had always felt that would be one of the good ways to go to reduce pollution and so on, but as a pedestrian it was a nightmare because you had to be looking around, all around you, because cyclists are, you don’t hear them so well! I mean cars you are aware of, but which I found an interesting experience and you know really changed my view. Yes I mean an ideal world I think it would be to separate pedestrians, cyclists and motorised transport. But to achieve that in the existing city I mean is, is so expensive, so radical, that I mean somewhere like Exeter you could only do it, like I say, by pulling down houses, well almost rebuilding the city. I mean I have never been to Milton Keynes, but I understand that there they’ve designed it so that there were cycle routes that were kept separate, so I don’t know how that works as I have never been there. And in terms of transport I think ideally, it’s almost a continuous tram or something where they are coming along almost all the time..
Gill: And hop on and off…
Thomas: But even then you get involved with having to change because you you’ve got to change direction, I mean It comes back to personal injury and personal journeys from A to B if that’s where you want to go rather than from A to C to D. But even if you had to change, if there was a very simple kind of track with almost like a walkway, some of these walkways, you would get around faster, the airport kind of walkways.
Moderator: Yes, good idea. I mean to be honest, and when it comes to environmental impacts and congestions and these things you are already doing quite well, both using public transport and walking, so it’s probably more about general negative effects.
Thomas: Yes, which is where I mean, I don’t think we are very typical, and I mean I, within my own family, I mean my children don’t use public transport, they have got cars and they would argue that they need the convenience, they haven’t got the time to use public transport, and I think that’s a very common response, and I think in general, I mean obviously people have got cars they will use cars!
Gill: That’s right yes. They do, well they say we tax it, we insure it, we might just as well use it as have it sitting there being expensive, you know. 
Thomas: Yes, and I think there are a lot of, I know a lot of people, who, I mean I know a lot of people who are entitled to the bus pass, over age bus pass, so they could get free transport, but would never think of using a bus, even though it’s absolutely free. Sort of people you know are going to do that, you’ve really got to have a very substantial financial penalty or some other way of, if you really want to encourage a lot of people to move, and a lot of people just, aren’t using public transport partly convenience but also I mean they are not that comfortable are they? 
Gill: Well I don’t have any problems, I do travel quite a bit, I often go up north to see, well he’s in Great Yarmouth, he was at Aberdeen, and I have travelled by train, I’ve even gone all the way by bus which took an arm and a leg, would you believe, you started about 6 in the morning and got there at 6 the next morning! So it was not quite as bad as that but almost you know! And I haven’t found it too bad, but I suppose it depends on your expectations Thomas, doesn’t it you know. 
Thomas: Yes I was thinking more of local ones, but yes I agree with you, we use coaches a lot, rather than the trains, but that’s choice. But in local buses we refer to the, or these local ones, they I don’t think are that comfortable, and if they were more heavily used, so that they were full, I mean they are actually licensed to have about 20 people standing, aren’t they? I mean if that actually occurred they would be really unpleasant. 
Moderator: Thanks a lot. You already mentioned some things, we developed, when it comes to daily travel, so not to confuse you I will read them out loud to you as well to give you some time to go through it. I want you to, first I have to say this is purely hypothetical, you don’t have to be afraid that some of this will be introduced in Exeter, at least not basing on your answers or whatever, because sometimes people are afraid that we will introduce congestion charging or something like that, so they say oh I think it’s completely rubbish! Anyway just go through it and you can either pick one of the points and say, tell me your opinion about that, and if you think it’s a good, it could be the thing and encourage people to change travel behaviour, or tell me if you think that’s completely nonsense, people will try to refuse them. But the first thing I would ask you, what’s your view on these things? So if you can just go through it and scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport, punctuality and reliability, new smart card ticketing, maybe like oyster cards, simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements and obviously there is a need for increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures if you want to achieve that. That is scenario one, scenario two includes increased parking charging in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, so these are the more radical steps, particularly for cars omitting more pollutants which could be an issue. Congestion charges in most towns and cities, more toll roads, paying to drive, where you pay more to drive further and you pay more to drive in congested areas, major improvements in public transport from these tax revenues would be a benefit from that. Another result would be resulting major improvements in public transport services, significant reduction in congestion on major roads, and a significant reduction in carbon emissions. And scenario three, includes banning vehicles with highly polluting engines in general, no car base maybe, one day a week, or full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones, quite similar we already have something like that in Exeter. Or restrictions on the number of cars each household could own. So what do you think? It’s quite a lot of that! We have some more comments on this don’t we. Major and sustained increases in turbo fuel, do you have that? That’s the effects, yes. And switch over to public transport for the infrastructure because it’s important. Major reduction in carbon emissions as a result. Okay, let’s go back to your views on these things.
Thomas: Yes, I mean the increase in service relates to what I was suggesting, you want something you can jump on quick, but on the other hand, I mean there is obviously a real cost in providing something as frequent as that. In relation to the number of people, the number of potential users, which is why it may well work in London, and in fact we were talking about it earlier, that there you don’t worry about the timetables because there is a bus going to come along in 4 or 5 minutes, whenever. But you can’t do that in every city. I mean the smart card ticket is something I really think they, I mean they should do throughout the country, but certainly in Exeter, as I said I used the oyster card system and it must have saved so much time in the handling of cash, yes I would certainly be fully in favour of seeing that introduced. And I, on the rail, I mean I certainly think simpler fare structures, I mean I find those very complicated.
Moderator: We’ll come to that.
Thomas: Yes okay. 
Moderator: You are absolutely right, that is probably one of the main things that disencourage people from using them. 
Thomas: The cycling, I mean, I’m not sure about that.
Gill: No
Thomas: We both live on our knees to the city now. Wherever you go from there you are going to have a hill!
Gill: But there are excellent cycling facilities around that area aren’t there, there are lots of cycle, designated cycle routes or whatever.
Thomas: That’s right, and again, I mean, come back to how you can implement it in a city of the age of Exeter, which has its streets, and without altering those substantially, which I think the cycling facilities there are, I mean I think some of them are actually quite dangerous because they are not continuous I mean they have their own cycle path for some of the time, then they will be shoved onto the road, sometimes they share the pavement with pedestrians. It’s a bit of a mess in Exeter I think. But the only way you are going to avoid that I mean is by having cycle lanes. That takes up space. I mean, the other thing that I don’t think there has been enough of in Exeter is one way, is to have more one way systems and then you’ve got a whole half a road, becomes available for other uses, if you can organise your one way system.
Gill: Yes, and don’t you think the major public transport infrastructure improvements sums it all up? I mean if you start there then we’ll sort of go on won’t we? And hopefully, but of course what you want to know was what those improvements are, is that what you are really asking? 
Moderator: Probably yes, that’s right.
Thomas: And that’s the ideal world. I mean something in relation to that is linkage of transport systems and even within one system I mean buses..
Gill: To the environment.
Thomas: And also knowing that connections will be made, I mean if you have got to change from one bus to another you know what the time it should be there, and you know that it is going to be there. Again very difficult in the city, because as you all know trying to keep to the timetable within a city depends on the congestion of the traffic and, so again without having totally separate public transport lanes, if you had a bus lane all the way, then they could probably!
Moderator: Yes, so what do you think about this more radical steps like increase in fuel taxes and car taxes, I mean you don’t have a car but..
Gill: I don’t have a car, but I think they are taxed enough. I don’t really think that that is going to make it any better, it might even make it worse. 
Thomas: Yes and I think, I think people’s feelings about that are going to reflect to some extent how they feel about society I mean personally I feel that, that is going to allow richer people to do what they want! In that sense it is unfair. Unless you believe in a system where the more money you’ve got then the more influence you should have. So in general, I wouldn’t, apart from encouraging people to move to greener cars, which I think came from somewhere else.
Moderator: Yes it is included in some way.
Thomas: Yes, I think I would certainly go along that, to encourage people to move towards electric cars or, dual fuel cars, that kind of thing. And that could be encouraged through taxation and different VAT rates. And the very high performance cars and things mentioned somewhere about that, I mean... 
Moderator: That’s scenario three, but that’s okay.
Thomas: But, well certainly I would be quite happy to see them banned, because I don’t see the point of having cars that are produced to do 120 miles an hour if we are saying that no way we’re going to allow that to occur on our roads, you know it just seems crazy. That is something I’m probably occurring in scenario two that you know I believe in having lower speed limits, I mean it is interesting that in Exeter, I mean there are large areas of 20 mph maximum, we live in one, and I’m very happy with that. People argue that people don’t drive at that speed, but my experience is that they do because they’ve put in speed ramps and various ways of, which make it very difficult to drive very much faster than that, and what I’ve found is that over the years, having to drive at 20 mph for quite a bit of the time, means that when you are then on a more open road, driving at 50 seems perfectly adequate and it feel quite fast! Which is why now I mean I tend to be driving at 50 – 55 rather than 70. So I mean I think that could have a good effect, and I think, well personally I feel on the more open roads then 50 mph limit you know seems fine. I mean, certainly on my car, it makes a huge difference in terms of fuel consumption, probably 40%, driving at 50 instead of 70. And if it, I mean at one time I mean I think it was set at that I think during one of the crises, and I know in America they did for a while, didn’t they, and I think it’s been increased again now. 
Moderator: Yes they are also having effects on that definitely. Okay.
Gill: Well I don’t drive, and so I can’t really sort of comment there.
Moderator: No that’s okay, really.
Thomas: On the congestion charge schemes, as far as I know they work, and clearly people are using the park and ride schemes around Exeter which I’m quite surprised by, but I assume that it is because of financial effects, and if you drive in and you’ve got to park and pay for parking, it must be working out more than if you park and ride, because I think the hassle of actually having to park, wait for a bus, get on a bus, and coming back, you know, the difference in monetary terms I assume it is fairly substantial, I don’t know. I haven’t got any experience of it, and don’t use it, but those, but if it is a factor then great, I mean that keeps them out of the city centre and where I would like to see more pedestrianised areas. Real pedestrianisation. But you can only do that if you haven’t got this flowing traffic continuously.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. Okay. Probably can turn over to the next…...
Gill: Next one
Moderator: …issue. Yes
Thomas: I just, didn’t mention the no car days either.
Moderator: You don’t think they would work?
Thomas: I don’t see that…
Moderator: Your in good company because everybody going to think that
Gill: Do they have, most firms or businesses have a car sharing day where they take in turns, colleagues take in turns picking up another member of staff or something.
Moderator: Yes, some cycle to work days or something like that?
Gill: Yes
Moderator: Yes your quite right yeh some schemes like that, yes
Gill: And that must work because they’ve been doing that for a while now haven’t they?
Thomas: I mean the car sharing I think is significant and not just for work either, again with our walking, I mean we will try to share cars as much as possible so we are not driving three or four cars when we could all get in one car and, and I don’t know how common that is in general but it’s something that could be encouraged. I mean I think it’s good to see the county is actually encouraging people to share cars, how successful that is I have no idea.
Moderator: Ok holiday travel
Gill: Holiday travel?
Moderator: Yes.
Gill: Right.
Moderator: Again three scenarios, I mean unfortunately holiday travel is a little bit responsible for the environment damages we are experiencing and flying is pretty much related to some negative effects so if we want to change peoples holiday travel behaviour, so I would again ask you to go through these points a little bit less than the other list fortunately and tell me your views if you think this would work. Yes if you can go through it, it’s just scenario one includes carbon offsetting schemes and incentive wise long distance rail travel where we reduce costs, already been mentioned I think, or simplify it. Provide amply based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave for using slower modes of transport, and incentive wise UK holidays perhaps through tax breaks and not paying VAT for a UK holidays. These are the points in scenario one, Scenario two includes increased air passenger tax a duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environment reformates of the aeroplane, would those of you mention and invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK. And Scenario three is just, just one point including provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, like flying, daily travel, energies at home, they can undertake. To explain that, I mean with this aim to achieve 80% reduction in carbon emissions, one, for instance one approach is to, to give everybody a good carbon budget and they can use it for whatever they want and if they want to fly they have to for instance drive less or save energy at home or something like that. That’s the whole idea behind that one. So again your views? Sorry?
Gill: Is that being debated at the moment is it?
Moderator: Not, not not really, not urgently but its on the brink of introducing something, but its one of the ideas that could be brought up you know, to maybe, yeh I would say to keep people, or still allow people to fly to certain places for instance, so but in general what do you think about these things? Is there anything that would affect you or you think would work for other people to change their holiday travel choices?
Thomas: I think I mean this ties in a bit with something I was saying earlier that, I mean if there really are huge climatic problems, then I think that the move should be involve people to have activities that are more local, I mean I think that really would have a bigger effect than some of these other things. I mean carbon offsetting and these budgets I don’t see how you, it would work without enforcing some view of what’s good, what’s bad and not giving people choices, people you know want to, want to fly once every two years, why should they be penalised if someone else I mean is driving hundreds of miles every weekend, then I think in practice I don’t see how, how they would work. 
Moderator: Thank you.
Gill: Looking at the.. I’m sorry Thomas you were saying?
Thomas: No, no
Gill: On the scenario one the incentive for UK holiday perhaps through tax breaks etc. this year they called it a stay-cation didn’t they
Thomas: Yes
Moderator: Yes that’s correct.
Gill: People didn’t fly off abroad they stayed home in England. Thinking about that why did they do that. Which may sort of bring us round eventually to some conclusion, because they couldn’t afford it now, I think that’s the main reason why lots of people didn’t travel. Not because they felt that it was going to be not very good with regard to carbon omissions and that sort of thing. Simply that they could not afford it, if they could have of afforded it they would have gone wouldn’t they. Well I think so anyway, people that normally do. So tax breaks and not paying VAT on UK holidays wouldn’t work I don’t think. If not just because it’s going to be the wee bit more cheaper it isn’t going to stop people flying off abroad or wherever it is they are going to go. That’s my view on that particular one, nothing else but just a thought.
Moderator: Ok thanks.
Thomas: Yes I don’t really see what’s meant by that because you might be able to break us for transport but most of the holiday costs are nothing to do with transport  Its not though you can incentivise it just for UK holidays. I mean the employee one is interesting isn’t it, I’ve never heard of that before.
Moderator: Interesting that’s one that has already been introduced.
Thomas: Right.
Gill: Promoting slower travel?
Moderator: I don’t know what company it is but I think they give you at least one or two more days if you travel by train instead of flying to some places.
Gill: You are joking?
Moderator: Yes I mean that’s a good way to encourage people I think, because then you start thinking about it, is it really worth flying to Barbados or whatever you know if you can go by train.
Gill: Yes.
Moderator: You hear of good train connections to Europe.
Gill: So they give you those days for travelling then?
Moderator: Yes because they say it takes longer to go by train to Spain than just fly from I don’t know, Exeter UK so. So when I coached the people that’s they way they do it. I mean it’s one or two cases as far as I know so it’s not really spread out at the moment, but it’s an interesting idea I think.
Thomas: That’s right, yes.
Moderator: Could encourage people to think about it.
Thomas: Yes. But again I mean one of the problems with us not being typical I think is that I mean I don’t think either of us have got young families now.
Gill: No grown up families.
Thomas: I mean that makes a huge difference. And I can sympathise with people who say well you know you’ve got three kids we’ve got to have the car to take all our bits and pieces.
Gill: That’s right, yes.
Thomas: I am not sure that we can offer any alternative to people who want to take that family fun holiday on public transport. Particularly nowadays actually where, you know I mean as a child we used to go and use public transport but that was just a case, whereas now people want there surf boards and everything else, and bikes..
Gill: Yes in deed it all goes doesn’t it?
Thomas: Which is all part of modern life, so I don’t see that ever being discouraged. Whether you can discourage about them not going abroad I don’t know, or whether you should because it’s, you know we’re part of Europe and if we want to go down to the sun.
Gill: Well that’s normally the reason they go abroad isn’t it? Personally I go abroad because I like architecture, historical facts, I don’t normally sit on the beach and enjoy the sun anywhere. I go abroad to do those things you know. But as you say people with young children say well the sun shines every day and it’s half the price to be on holiday somewhere than it is in England for instance you know. So that’s why they go, yes.
Thomas: So after this summer, it’s unfortunate I think, this was a great opportunity for people to feel oh yes great in this country, but because of the summer.
Gill: It’s not going to be so.
Thomas: Could be the opposite affect.
Moderator: Ok. Thanks a lot. Yes go ahead
Thomas: I mean the whole business about tax you know I think is difficult as I say because I think it’s something you’ve got to decide on the fairness of any taxation system, yes usually if there are clear advantages in using certain types of equipment for improving cars, improving aircraft, but taxing individuals, not really so happy about. 
Gill: No.
Thomas: Because I believe in people having the choice to use their resources how they want to, providing it’s not causing enormous problems for everyone else, and as you say at the moment it’s not a clear case.
Gill: No.
Thomas: That flying is going to ruin the world.
Gill: In deed not, no.
Thomas: And I think what makes it more complicated I mean is the scientific advances mean that this is changing all the time, I mean the efficiency of cars you know has changed, has changed so tremendously in the last ten, twenty years. I mean an interesting thing that’s come out of our economic problems I think is this subsidy by the government of people buying new cars. I mean I think that’s really dumb simply to keep the manufacturers going.
Gill: Car industry going.
Thomas: But…
Gill: Keep people in work.
Thomas: But I mean the concept I mean because it was for older cars wasn’t it?
Moderator: Yes.
Thomas: Cars of ten years or older, and as an environmental policy I mean there seems some sense in that because I mean any car over ten years old are most certainly much less efficient and more polluting, but they are often owned by people I mean who are on the lower income so that’s why they’ve got an old car.
Gill: Can’t afford to change it every couple of years, yes.
Thomas: So there is a way in which government could move, and in fact they have for a short while, not for environmental reasons I don’t think.
Gill: I think carbon footprint for everybody is a good idea. Even though I am a bit sceptic you know
Moderator: Yes.
Gill: I think if you, you were made aware, I did it online one, just after      mu son finished his course I did my carbon footprint online and pleased to say I was very good.
Moderator: Ok
Gill: I did all the right things.
Moderator: Congratulations.
Gill: Yes, or seemed to do most of the right things.
Moderator: Yes ok.
Gill: But I do think if everybody was given their own carbon footprint it might jog their conscience a little bit and they might be a little bit more thoughtful or careful with their actions and with their way of life, if it was brought home to them that they probably might be doing more damage than good, yes, that’s my opinion, yes.
Moderator: Very good.
Gill: How would you feel if you felt that you were over doing it?
Thomas: The problem is how you enforce it, I mean if it’s going to be a system where you’ve got this budget.
Moderator: That’s right, yes.
Thomas: I don’t know how you can work that.
Gill: Well just…
Thomas: Yes well if somehow it was enforceable like a rationing system.
Gill: Yes.
Thomas: But I take your point if it is a way of encouraging people to think.
Gill: Well that’s right, not judgemental, I didn’t mean judgemental just to be aware.
Thomas: Yes
Gill: Of what is happening and what you are doing to cause that.
Thomas: Yes
Gill: Rather than judging you’re over the top or you’re not doing enough so to speak you know.
Thomas: Yes and what would be good to know how much of this is getting through to the younger generation, of which I really have no idea, I haven’t got children at school now.
Gill: Thomas think about smoking I mean the younger generation are very aware of the damage that smoking is doing, more so than the older generation who smoke and say oh well I’ve gone this far I might just as well carry on I don’t want to give up, I’m going to carry on. I think younger people are more aware of the environment and what is happening around us than we older people are.
Thomas: You would certainly hope so.
Gill: Yes, yes.
Thomas: But I’m wondering what with the consumer pressures their under I don’t know.
Moderator: Thank you very much. I am sorry to say that we…
Gill: Out of time.
Moderator: We are running out of time. If you have two more minutes I’ll come to my last question.
Gill: Oh right sorry.
Thomas: Yes.
Moderator: No because it is pretty much related to what you just said.
Gill: Yes, yes.
Moderator: I mean I would ask of people what would work for them but in your case what do you think of other people, if we want to encourage people to change their travel behaviour what do you think are the key messages you need to hear, or they need to hear and from whom and what policies need to change, so you already said for instance if we are giving them an impression of what…
Gill: Carbon footprint.
Moderator: What carbon they could use could encourage more responsible behaviour, so..
Gill: Yes.
Moderator: So what else maybe?
Thomas: In doing that I mean I think you have also got to accept you aren’t going to convince everybody, I mean you are always going to have a hard core say I want to drive a hundred miles an hour.
Moderator: Yes that’s right.
Gill: Because I can.
Thomas: So the best that you can hope for is that the majority at least have an idea, whether you are going to change them I don’t know. You’ve probably got to really scare people, I think which is almost what the government is trying to do in saying they unless we do something, then in 40, 50 years time we’re going to be in serious trouble. Maybe as you said, I mean maybe there is still no clear case or people aren’t accepting that yes that’s definitely going to happen, because they don’t trust the government anyway, because the government said it. So it probably has to be someone independent of the government I think, to convince people. I mean the idea I think the government is going to issue one of these meters so you can measure how much energy devices are consumed.
Gill: In the home, yes.
Thomas: That’s right.  That I think is moving in the right direction, because then people can see something specific. It’s a bit like the water meters, you introduce a water meter then people become much more aware of just wasting it and the same applies to energy and I think even now I don’t think people do accept that if you leave your equipment on standby it’s still consuming.
Gill: It is, it is.
Thomas: A large amount of energy.
Moderator: That’s right.
Thomas: And I don’t know the figures, I mean I would be interested in trying some of mine I would give you my wife leaving our pc on standby is still consuming and I tend to switch it off which means it then takes longer to boot up, it’s actually at a price, and they are a priceless rule these things.
Gill: They are.
Thomas: Like I say walking I would encourage people to do by example, in general that probably means you are going to have less time to do other things.
Gill: That’s right, yes.
Thomas: My wife, I said we used to regularly walk into Exeter and back, which is a couple of miles and I think she just found it boring after a while, if you do it regularly whereas I was always quite happy to. Got into a dream world I don’t know.
Gill: Going back to with regard to energy conservation. I was going to say conversation but I meant conservation. Technology needs to change as well actually I think. For instance you can’t turn certain, well you can turn certain items off, for instance if you have a DVD, video player etc. it has a time, it has a clock on it which keeps going because it’s battery operated, but then when you turn it back on again you have to start all over afresh and retune it in. Digital radios, even my cooker, if I turn my cooker off there is still a clock on it that goes, carries on. My washing machine again, so you cannot turn them completely off, can you? Even if you turn the switch off at the wall they are still operating. So technology also needs to be taken into consideration in those sort of things, doesn’t it?
Thomas: Yes
Gill: Yes, yes.
Thomas: Which is why encouraging people to move to cleaner energy in the way of, as I say electric cars maybe, but I think all the arguments in relation to alternative energy sources, you know like wind farms I mean it’s interesting or disappointing in a way that, how selfish people can become about that.
Gill: Yes.
Thomas: So if you are looking at their personal lives and you’re asking them to change that it is very difficult.
Gill: Yes.
Thomas: I mean without terrifying them, what will happen if they don’t.
Gill: Yes.
Moderator: Yes you’re right.
Gill: That’s right, yes.
Moderator: Ok. Thank you very much.
Gill: My pleasure.
Moderator: That was really interesting.
Gill: Thank you.