Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Thank you very much for being here, as I said, first thing I want to ask you is a short introduction round, if you could just say your first name and if you want to what you are doing and anything else you want to tell us. My name as I said is Moderator I am a researcher from Exeter University and so maybe starting with you.
Thomas: I am XXX but everybody calls me Thomas, Scottish as you can tell by the accent.
Moderator: Okay
Thomas: I am retired, health service, I have quite a bit all the way to different places and I have come across lots of travel problems in lots of places.
Moderator: Okay, thank you.
Tim: I am Tim, I am also retired, an engineer.
Moderator: Thank you. Okay. I will during this 60 minutes I will go through my list of questions and really ask you some questions and as I said feel free to tell us your views and opinions on these things. The first one is a really general one, you know we are focusing on daily travel, how people move from A to B and what they use for going shopping or leisure trips or whatever. But those are holiday trips you know so we try to in this first section we want to include all travel related things and the first question is a really general one. Do you feel that we need to change the way we travel?
Thomas: I would say so.
Moderator: Yes and why you think so?
Thomas: Well there’s a few different ways because I think most people are buying into the idea that it’s healthier for the environment and for us as people if we were more active in our ways of travel, physically active. So therefore that brings in cycling and walking. The problem is that people are afraid to cycle because there is too much traffic on the road. Mothers are over protective of children. I used to be a cyclist in my youth and you used to go off on holiday on my bike, you know, with my friends go off for a week in youth hostel. So I was reasonably fit and I enjoyed my fitness, I wasn’t forced into it. Today the kids don’t do anything like that and now you’ve got problems like obesity and all the troubles you see today in children. They can’t just go out and play, out on their bike, which is an afraid thing. So I would be all for more cycling, but that would mean restructuring your roads in someway or another. I would also be in favour of better transport by train, rather than bus. But the problem in this country, because I’m an old codger now so I can gripe, is that the cost of travel is too expensive, public transport. Particularly trains, it’s ridiculous when you can fly cheaper than you can go by train. I would love to go by train, but I’m a pensioner, limited income, you must therefore look at what’s the cheapest way to go from A to B, that’s the governing question it’s often down to cash.
Moderator: Thanks, Tim?
Tim: I certainly agree with everything Thomas has said, whole heartedly, I probably mainly want to add in my opinion the issue regarding the pre-dominancy of the car in life for all of us and everything, shopping, whatever it is, kind of is designed as time goes on around the use of the car and obviously we are all very aware of the harm that can do with the sort of energy that cars use, so if there are ways that can still give people the ability, especially the majority of population that still work to get to and from work every day, without using cars as much, then that’s go to be a way to go, but as Thomas said it’s got to be economically viable for those people and the convenience element is always the thing that’s going to swing it for the car.
Moderator: Right, thank you. Can you maybe think of other reasons for changes in travel behaviour, do you see any other reasons why it could be necessary?
Thomas: To make people change their habits.
Moderator: Ok.
Thomas: Do you mean other reasons….
Moderator: For necessity to change travel.
Thomas: The necessity to change?
Moderator: Yes.
Thomas: Well life is just too crowded now, you know in most respects. If you just look at the way it’s going is that, we are governed by basically fossil fuels and if we could find another source of energy it would make things easier. Course moving slowly in that way because they used to have big cars now we have small cars. Be nice just everyone downsizing to accommodate them, still to hang onto the convenience to get to and from and doing it when you want, is what I really want. But I’ve suffered through generations with a poor public transport infrastructure, that’s when you compare it to Holland, Germany, Switzerland, any of these places, Spain, how much cheaper it is and how efficient the trains run on time, but this country has suffered from, you know, really up down travel, it just doesn’t work, nothing’s coordinated. It was better coordinated back in the 1946/47 when you considered that buses met the trains, buses were a public service and everything seemed to work, inefficiently but it worked. Then you privatised, deregulated, you’ve got 15 buses coming along at a particular time to capture the people going to work and they weren’t interested in anyone else because that’s often down to finance.
Tim: Yes I mean one of the things which I think Thomas leaded to really, influencing people away from using cars would be certainly congestion, but then of course when you live in a kind of rural area like we do it’s not as much of an issue, so that will take a bit longer I think to change in those kind of areas, but certainly in the cities, But again in the cities or the surrounding suburbs, usually the public transport would be available and probably more geared to people using it to get into and out of the cities, but again I guess for a lot of people cost is always going to be a big factor and but despite the cost I still think, probably the one thing that would be stopping people from changing from using cars as much as we all do, would be convenience, because people are prepared to pay a lot of money for convenience, especially those that are working.
Thomas: Exactly, and the other aspect is big businesses geared, they have always tried to stay one jump in front. Cities became congested when they brought in parking regulations to discourage people from bringing their cars in. So what do big business do they move Tesco and everyone all to the outside and they make massive big car parks and they encourage people to use cars, and it just keeps doing that, not only that now the supermarkets are giving you discounted petrol to encourage you to carry on using.
Tim: And of course it is prejudice heavily against people who don’t have cars.
Thomas: Exactly.
Tim: There where of life is coming to terms by having a car with money they don’t have.
Thomas: And it ends up that people are forced into buying cars and that keeps the market going and they say oh well if the factory shuts down and stops making cars people would be unemployed blah, blah, blah, the same stories. It’s a mindset that has to changed and that’s a difficult thing to do to a nation, you know change a mindset, you can only use something dramatic.
Moderator: We will come to that in a second because we have a list of potential measures on travel behaviour changes and I will ask you opinion on that. But at the moment the next, again relatively general question and what is your view on, the current transport policy? Maybe if you want to talk about the national level or in general what do you think?
Thomas: Well policy is, policy dictating by a parliament that are to busy trying to hang on to quotas and (9.49) that’s the problem. Maybe you should think to radical, an idea to bring this congestion charge in London, which worked, you know, people started using the buses. But they have a good structure there, they have got underground system, and you can go across London in minutes. You couldn’t do that in Exeter! In Exeter it is now grid locked, when I first came to Exeter it wasn’t as grid locked, and that was nice, it only got grid locked in the summer times when tourists came through, then you expected your journey to take an extra half an hour. Maybe that’s my opinion of what happened.
Tim: I mean policy, I think the policy is really not there to support people to start using public transport really. It’s certainly not encouraged, for the one example you gave yourself Thomas, with rail travel, I think rail is a great way to travel except for the price, you know, we would drive to friends we have in the North rather than take the train, mainly because of the price, and yet convenience there’s not a lot really in it, because you can drive to Totem Parkway and get virtually anywhere in the country for a year for the price of the rail travel, or if we were going to Scotland we would fly.
Thomas: Well they are introducing faster trains, but they are still expensive (11.25) for the cost of one train ticket. And there are other things that are geared I mean we are both pensioners so we have…
Tim: Well I am not a pensioner yet, I’m retired but I don’t get mine till next year actually! That’s okay.
Thomas: The thing is I am a pensioner so if you’ve got a travel pass right, but you are not allowed to go on the bus until 9.30, see now that’s absolutely silly, because that’s fine when everyone else has to be in the office at 9 o’clock or something, but there’s nothing, people are in their offices, they are at their job, their at their places of employment by 9 o’clock, so elderly people can go on at 9 o’clock, I mean that stops a lot of old people going in, because they want to do their shopping, to have it by first thing in the morning, it’s just the way we’ve been brought up.
Tim: No that’s a good point, yes.
Thomas: Simply little things that (12.18) every little bit of (12.24)
Moderator: Thanks a lot. A little tricky question, I have to explain, if you can imagine an ideal world, you know where everything is perfect the way it is and we can use public transport and maybe cycling is convenient and whatever, everything is in walking distance and something that this, an ideal world travel wise. How would you like to travel in this ideal world? Are you still angling for the same things you are already using? Are you happy the way you are travelling? Or would you prefer to use another means of transport, would that be possible for you? I mean you have already mentioned you would rather use the train for visiting friends rather the train instead of the car.
Tim: Yes with the right prices and the stations and services being what suits my personal needs then I certainly would prefer to take the train rather than drive.
Thomas: That’s what works in Holland isn’t it. That’s the reason, down to the train and they have good services and they have the tramways and all the rest of it. I am a car user and I am a car user because I grew into being a car user. I never had a car until I was 20 and as a child I went everywhere with my parents on public transport. I mean we went to Glasgow we had great trams, I used to go visit my Aunts and my Uncles, my cousins and that, we jumped on the tram and that was it and you jumped off and onto another tram, you never thought twice about it. Then they brought in trolley buses, which weren’t as good as the trams, because trams were good fun. And then trains were the other things, the bus, we occasionally used the bus and that might have been either because the trains were on strike! So you had to get bus. But we always travelled that way, we never thought about, didn’t want to have a car. My father never had a car, never drove all his life, and that was it you spent Sundays, you went for walks, you did this, tram or bus.
Tim: Don’t you think though in those days, because I mean my childhood was much the same, although I lived on the outskirts of London, but you know similar getting around it was easy. But to be honest, I mean you know going back to my childhood, cars weren’t available you know some people had them but it was pretty unusual but as soon as they became more available, more affordable, it gradually became something you grow into like you did.
Thomas: It is, there is two types of things, one is a status symbol that comes from owning a car, you know the man down the roads got a car what’s wrong with us! You know it’s like television (15.38) it’s keeping up with the Jones’. So what I would say is for travel to change is to introduce it in such a way that to keep up with the Jones’ means giving the car up. It’s just getting the mindset changed.
Tim: And the other thing, you talk about travel generally in your ideal world, whatever that means, you know long distances you can eliminate some things like walking and cycling, for me anyway, I am not going to cycle to the Midlands to watch a football match or something, so you know if you mean, if you mean locally, I guess the thing that, although I cycle a bit, but the thing that puts me off more than anything is our climate. On good days I use my bike fairly often and on other days you know, maybe if I want to go a bit further, I have a motorbike as well, I use that. But most of the time for things like shopping or visiting further a field I use the car.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. So this leads us back to one of the questions I have asked you could this be, maybe a reason for changing peoples travel behaviour, I mean things like air quality. I didn’t bring up the issue of that, but normally another thing we ask people is what they think about, the British government just announced they want to reduce the carbon emissions but 80%, transport is a huge part of that commitment so we will see if that will be possible to achieve and that’s why I want to give you a list of certain, we call it scenarios. You’re your time and read it through. Some are more or less incentives. I will read it out for you to, to give you some time to go through. Some are more drastic, more radical approaches, I want you to go through and don’t be afraid that some of these would be introduced in Exeter or Collumpton, are completely hypothetical so you can tell me your comments about one of the scenarios or you can, I would ask you to pick out certain points that you think that would be good and this would work for you or other people to change travel behaviour and you could also tell me if you think this would never work, so we can go through the list. Scenario one was an increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport, punctuality and reliability, you use smart card ticketing simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements and an increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures. These are more or less all related to public transport. Scenario two, much more related to the car, increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, in particular for cars emitting more pollutants, congestion charges in most towns and cities, more toll roads, paying to drive, you pay more to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas and some of the resolves would be major improvements in public transport from these tax revenues, resulting in major improvements in public services, significant reduction in congestion on major roads and significant reduction in carbon emissions. And a couple more points in scenario three, banning vehicles with highly polluting engines, maybe no car weeks would work, one day a week or something like that, full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones, we already have some city centres transformed to this. Restrictions on the number of cars each household could own, major and sustained decreases in traffic levels would be a result, a switch over to public transport for its infrastructure and major reductions in carbon emissions. So is there anything that you think could work or would be most promising from your point of view, or do you want to say none of this would be possible or would change peoples travel behaviour or whatever you want to say. Yes go ahead.
Thomas: Yes I think scenario one, yes it’s got it all there. Because if your frequency of service, you know, punctuality and reliability, smart card ticketing, because you see them different, I mean with Singapore when all these prices, I mean sorry about that (20.29) bus service all interlinked, they go on the bus and they’ve got their card, they just slap it against the board and it goes ‘ping’ and the driver hears the ping and if he doesn’t hear the ping that’s the only time he pays attention. And you just go and sit down, on and off.
Tim: Very efficient.
Thomas: Efficient and the ticket also works on a train system, that goes round the city, if you go on that and even people purchase their ticket when they purchase the smart card ticket, which is very cheap, once you’ve finished your journey you just go back to the ticket station and put it in you get half your money back and it recycles the tickets. So there’s no tickets left on the ground or anything like that so it’s things like that that are interesting yes.
Tim: Never heard of that one before.
Moderator: But it’s something that we could improve…
Thomas: Any card you buy is only 70p, to finish your journey, you finish your journey there’s a booth you stick it in there and cash comes out and that tickets goes back and recycled for the next day.
Tim: Yes certainly scenario one is obviously the big thing politically and for governments who are looking, always short term really, it’s not political to look long term is it. The increased taxation is the one that people, nobody’s going to like, but on the other hand there will come a time when I guess we all have to face up to it, you know isn’t a lot of option.
Thomas: The only other thing I would say to that is you have to then look at the social implications of small places, because what’s happened today is because of the reliability in the car, buses don’t go to certain villages because there’s nobody there to use the bus, everyone has got a car. So you would have some sort of guarantee that if the village gave up the cars for buses to replace, and everyone can go in and out whenever they choose and the local people can make up their own time table if they were democratically related with their local towns council, you could do it that way because in the old days parish council, these services, they actually ran them, it would be going back to the beginning again.
Tim: Fine, scenario three one thing that jumped out at me was where it says restrictions on the number of cars in each household, I mean, you know, things like taxation you have to accept if you, whether you’ve voted for a certain government that’s in power or not, you have to accept levels of taxation direct or indirect, but to start inflicting that I mean we are just going away from democracy then aren’t we, you know. I mean is the next thing that you’re only allowed one child! Where does it stop you know. So you know.
Moderator: I see what you mean. I mean some people improve, I mean do something about the size of the car, you know.
Tim: Sure.
Moderator: So this would be not quite similar but in the same direction.
Tim: Yes. Well I think it comes back again to if people really for their lifestyle or their business or whatever it is, need a large vehicle then I think they should pay….
Thomas: More money for it.
Tim: Accordingly, you know. I don’t have a problem with that if it was me.
Moderator: So the congestion charges have already been mentioned I think. And I think it was you Thomas saying that in places like Exeter or scale of Exeter, this wouldn’t work because you need a functioning public transport system.
Thomas: Yes, trouble with here is that people going to London are more aware of this than me, they either live in London or they’re in the catchment area of the tube, so therefore they have a pretty good start, kick start to discourage them from taking the car, just because it happens to rain, you know they might do that. Whereas if someone is serviced by places like this, dormitory types really, because people go into the city and they don’t have a good enough public transport system to get there. So there has to be an improvement first, I suppose it’s the carrot, they call it the chicken and egg situation. You see the trouble is everyone is afraid, everyone would like to use public transport but if they gave up their car and couldn’t get it back they have committed themselves to be dependant on a government that tomorrow could change their mind and say alright we don’t want to spend the money they will save on a good public service, we’re going to buy a (25.36) instead! But what can you do about it, because they’ve changed, moved the goal posts this country too much.
Tim: I find it very difficult to be optimistic about introducing things to encourage people to give up cars, I think society has got so dependant on the convenience and everything else that even if things were improved and other forms of transport were improved I think there still would be a lot of people that who would cling to that car because it means so much to them now, you know it’s something that they’ve become very used to the convenience. I don’t know. I was just going to say the only way you would do it is financially. I mean just by saying well we’ve give you buses and we’ll give you trains and you’ll be able to get to work, it might take a bit longer but it will be convenient and so on. I don’t think people, I don’t think that would happen. I think we’ve all become far too focused around the car now. It would have to be more financial pressure.
Thomas: The thing is it would be nice to know what sort of outcome that’s discovered from pensioners again using the free bus pass, leaving their cars because a lot of them do, 9.30 in the morning at the top of the road there.
Tim: Yes, yes.
Thomas: There is a queue of pensioners (27.04) because they say what can we do today, we could go to Sidmouth, because they won’t use their car anymore, but the thing that stops them is if they leave at 9.30. If you wanted to go to Sidmouth for example from Collumpton, 9.30 you get into the bus station quarter past 10, it takes you best part of an hour to get there, you just missed the bus to Sidmouth, so you have to wait another hour for that bus, so by the time it takes an hour to get in, it’s then lunch time when you’ve got there, so you can’t just go there for like a full day, you’ve got to make sure you get that bus back because you can’t travel back at certain times, its in effect defeats the whole idea of it. For instance in Scotland, because in Scotland you get a free bus travel pass for the whole country. My cousin there gets up in the morning, goes down the bus station or the train station, because he used the train and ferry as well you see, and he looks up ‘where would I like to go today’, he takes a little overnight bag and he’d go to Aberdeen. He’s gone three hundred miles, four hundred miles, goes there spends the night there this hotel and nip across to Inverness and he goes round the country. He can be away most of the week because of free travelling. He’s still bringing money to the towns he visits because he’s, he’s got to eat, he’s got to sleep.
Tim: Sure.
Thomas: Other transport costs is minimum
Tim: It’s a pity really that you haven’t had at least one person turn up who is a regular commuter to and from work, I mean we’re atypical in many ways aren’t we? Because we’re not going to a place of work each day, so our travel habits are going to be quite different from probably the majority I guess.
Moderator: But we was interested in your opinion.
Tim : Of course, yes. Yes sure. And we’ve lived through working life where we’ve needed to get to work.
Moderator: Maybe you should think of people that are working or commuters, do you think, what do you think about schemes like car sharing or car clubs where you don’t have to own a car but you can use one, or you share with other people.
Tim: Yes very simple.
Moderator: Do you think that could work?
Tim: I think it could, yes. But again it would have to be geared around convenience and cost.
Thomas: When we were not such a insulate society in this country because, for example, people who work at Dagenham, Fords of Dagenham or somewhere like that, they ran car clubs, because they all worked at the same place and they all started at the same time, or whatever shift there was, the cars were then loaded with guys ‘it’s your turn to drive’ that doesn’t work. More people today live alone. Now young people your age who have their own house there not apart of anything like that, have their own transport, they do everything on the internet. So there’s no society as it was like that. No nuclear family, or in large family, people don’t work like that anymore. That’s the big change.
Tim: Far more individualism isn’t there, yes.
Thomas: There is too much individualism.
Moderator: Okay, maybe one last point I want to pick out. What do you think of something like no car days, one day a week or something like that. Would people accept that and try to change their behaviour just for one day or would it be impossible to do something like that?
Thomas: No I don’t think it would be impossible to introduce it but I’ll give you the symmetry of it. Business wouldn’t want it, because too many people would take a sicky on that day.
Moderator: Yes, okay.
Thomas: No car days…I’ve got the flu, end of storey. These businesses are going to cost for a no car day. No car day if you had very good infrastructure and you’ve got a reliable bus service going every five minutes, that’s no problem, minimal contest, because people would prefer to travel. How many people do you see on a train, they’re sitting, even on plane of course, they’re sitting and they’ve got their laptop, their actually doing all the business before they get there, you know I travel, I fly up to Scotland quite a lot of times, there’s always business boys on there just doing it all.
Tim: Yes I think it could work, but you can see there would be some objections.
Thomas: It worked in Mexico City didn’t it? They did it. Mexico City is one place. Just the other massive places that didn’t that it’s a shame they don’t like Shang Hi or places like that. For the same thing just pollution.
Moderator: Yes, these cities need to do something about pollution yes. So I think it has been introduced that you, somebody has introduced a system that you use your car only if its an even or odd number at the number place at the end.
Thomas: That’s right, on your number plate. Hong Kong or somewhere like that
Moderator: But they have to ensure that people don’t buy just the second number plate and change it.
Thomas: Or buy two cars!
Moderator: Yes, even that! Thanks a lot. Different, slight change pretty much the same scheme we again come up with a couple of possible measures, or potential measures I want to show you. This time it’s related to holiday travel, you know, unfortunately holiday travel is as many, many, not so good effects on the environment when it comes to climate change and these things, it’s believed that holiday travel is a major factor related to that. So again I want you to go through these, a little bit shorter lists and tell me what you think about it. Again I will read it out just to give a couple of minutes for you. Scenario one is much, pretty much related to some incentives like encouraging carbon offsetting schemes, if you don’t know what that means or other things just ask me afterwards. Incentives like long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs. That was already mentioned I think. Provide amply based schemes for promoting slower travel, by giving people more leave, incentives UK holidays perhaps through tax breaks and not paying VAT for UK holidays. Scenario two was some more radical measures like increased air passenger tax, a duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environmental prefermants of the airplane and invest tax revenues into more high speed rail lines in the UK, maybe that’s an option. And scenario three it’s quite, relatively simply, but complicated to develop I think, provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities like flying, daily travel, energy use at home, they can undertake. That means that people would be given a certain amount of carbon they can use for whatever they want and if they want to have a long distance flight they should maybe reduce their car travel or use less energy at home, or whatever.
Tim: To be able to do it?
Moderator: Yes. So what do you think of these things?
Thomas: (35.13)
Moderator: Sorry?
Thomas: Indeed wonder if it’s very hard to, programming it and it’s a bit of a big brother theme to it. You know too much….
Tim: Yes that was what was going through my mind.
Thomas: You know cameras following you about. 
Tim: It makes a lot of sense actually in theory it makes a lot of sense.
Thomas: It does.
Tim: I mean everything, again I come back to the same sort of thing as with the car, you said scenario two increasing the cost for people, to make them very aware that if they really want to do these things they have to pay for them, in order that the forms of transport are more cost effective and efficient, energy efficient and so on. But the danger if you take those sort of things and with the car restraints and costs implications, if you take them too far the danger then is a very much a two tier society again.
Thomas: Yes.
Tim: Those of us who are quite comfortably off, you know, or even more comfortably off people are going to be not too worried but you’re going to have quite a large chunk of the community who would be excluded.
Thomas: There would be an underclass of travellers, hikers.
Tim: Yes that’s a fact though isn’t it, it could happen.
Thomas: Certainly the thing they could do for travel, like short distance is this slower travel, air ships, you could go back to the zeppelins and all the rest of it. And why not because it worked, don’t use helium gas anymore and they don’t effect the environment as much.
Tim: Certainly not.
Thomas: Don’t use the same fuel. But I mean even small type airships, the thing with airships is it’s just straight up, straight out so you don’t need complicated airfields. You can have one in any city, it’s just a matter of organising the traffic routes and the heights and all the rest of it, but you could do that throughout Britain. As internal flight flying rather than easy jet.
Tim: Depending on where in the world they are used I guess they are more prone to weather problems aren’t they? I don’t know.
Thomas: Well if you think they used to have transatlantic balloons from Berlin to New York.
Tim: I suppose we ought to be able to, to have the technology to….
Thomas: And it was a slower and much more luxurious form of travel because if you did do overnight you had bedrooms (37.41). 
Tim: Yes that’s true.
Moderator: Interesting, nice idea.
Tim: Yes.
Moderator: I think it was a very convenient way to travel, but zeppelins are airships.
Thomas: Airships, I mean not just for people but cargo. I mean now that they are bringing in these large sails to put on cargo ships, to reduce their fuel.
Tim: Certainly incentivising UK holidays, that’s an interesting one, because this year there’s been a lot of statistic about the number of people taking UK holidays now that probably previously would have gone abroad because of the economic climate so yes it probably could have an impact.
Thomas: That would be a good incentive, you said no VAT or something like that, that boosts the internal economy as well. It can encourage people like my self, yes I will go to Newquay, because you can’t afford to go to Barcelona, because the exchange rate, you know, against the euros.
Tim: Well that’s interesting. Is this employee based scheme for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave, yes I mean interesting one. Whether it would work or not.
Moderator: I think interestingly enough, somebody I know asked, mentioned it has already been introduced by one or two companies you know. It’s not massive, I think that if you can prove that you use the train to go on holiday travel then they give you one or two more days holiday.
Tim: Excellent.
Moderator: And it seems to work pretty good, I mean..
Tim: I mean if it was introduced more maybe people would get more in tune with it then the take up might be better.
Moderator: That’s right. I don’t know if it’s just a subjective perception but normally people think their holiday time is so precious, they have to take the fastest mode of travel to get to the place spend as much time as they can, then fly back as fast as they can. So maybe, maybe it’s a promising thing I don’t know. Seems to be interesting
Tim: But certainly air travel and I think the longer term it’s got to be made more expensive, you know and more energy efficient as well, the actually aircraft themselves.
Thomas: They keep saying they are bringing in more energy efficient aircraft, working on different types of engines. But there are, I think that takes us all back to oil again doesn’t it and it’s because of the pennies they put on oil, it’s really the half of the whole problem, if we can get another mode of, combustion to get the engine going, I mean hydrogen or compressed air even and a car that runs with compressed air.
Tim: Yes.
Thomas: Non polluting, cheap. But the trouble is it’s the vested interest, there are a lot of factors, you know the oil people (41.05) business, you know.
Tim: But taking a longer term view, I mean oil, one thing is availability now and the cost related to that, but long term it’s going to run out at some stage.
Thomas: Yes.
Tim: And also it needs to be changed because of the impact on the environment again. So if we can find a more environmentally friendly fuel of some kind then that’s got to be, long term that’s got to be the only option really.
Thomas: Because basically, what I will say is, there is another fuel but we won’t let you have it!
Moderator: Interesting theory. Okay then. Thanks a lot. I am nearly through with my points on this, I mean I have again general question to round it all up, we are quite, a little bit ahead of schedule but I think you won’t mind. So if you again think about potential measures and these things that there isn’t a certainty for people to change travel behaviour. To get people to change their travel behaviour, you (42.19) or other people, I mean what are the key messages you need to hear from whom and what policies need to change, I mean there have been some implications before in this meeting but if you could just go back and think about again about the key messages people need to hear, or you in person and who should say it and what policies we need to enforce behaviour change when it comes to travel.
Thomas: I think Tim said it’s the cost factor of train, rail travel that would appeal to people, and I think that’s the general consensus on rail travel, because there’s no congestion in a sense you’re not in a queue of traffic, but when you are on the motorway you can suddenly get stuck for three hours.
Tim: If it’s convenient it’s a journey you can enjoy.
Thomas: Exactly, and you can you know there’s food, it’s warm, conversation, you can sit and read a book.
Tim: Yes.
Thomas: And they’ve got electricity you can plug in, you know. So I would rather go by train than go by plane but again it’s the cost factor.
Tim: I think as far as the message is concerned, I mean although it’s probably a bit way off yet, but I mean, at some stage we have to start giving people the message that things have to change, you know, if they, if the public social, sense of social responsibility for their kids and grand kids in the future realise that unless things change those future generations are going to have problems, then they are the kind of messages that we need to get over to people in a stronger way, because it’s easy to be very short time isn’t it. I mean we’ve got relatively short life spans, each of us but we’ve still got kids and grand kids that we would like to think are going to have a good life as well.
Thomas: The trouble is, because things move faster today, government things are short and quick fix.
Tim: Yes.
Thomas: Nobody actually goes from..
Tim: They don’t look beyond the five year political term do they? That’s the problem.
Thomas: That is the big hang up. But if you had cheap rail travel people would use the train.
Tim: But politically they could be cross party things couldn’t they, that everyone sits down and says well you know, I know it’s an ideal world again, but really long term that’s what they should be doing. They should be saying these things are more important than the political short term who’s going to be in power.
Thomas: That’s right.
Tim: They are things we should all agree fundamentally have to be done.
Thomas: It’s because people don’t trust politicians anymore.
Tim: Well that’s….
Thomas: Really comes down to that, don’t have a lot of faith in them, so people are more individual and the more individual you become and the more technology allows you to become more of an individual, so unless you are really bothered about the rest of society. Because if you can stick your little croft up at the top of the helm, have your own solar panels and wind turbine and produce your own electricity and have your own internet and broadband connection you can say yahoo sucks to the rest of the world because you can do what you like! And that’s what people are becoming like, that’s just the way we are going. We have been channelled that way, that’s the bad point. Children don’t walk to school, mother has to drive them there and she does it in a Chelsea tractor, you know a big 4 x 4, you know why don’t the mothers have tandems, for getting on the back, you know getting them to think differently, either exercise or the child getting a wee bit of exercise themselves, it’s more conducive to society. Special bicycle lanes would encourage them to do that. But no they don’t allow children out of sight, again our media is behind all that. It’s all a struggle. It can be done easily just need to, as Tim says change the mindset.
Moderator: Okay, thank you very much that was very interesting for me.
: 