Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Good afternoon everybody. It’s really nice to have you here. Your help is very much appreciated.  My name is Moderator, I am a researcher at Exeter university working in the department of geography and we are having a really relaxed discussion about your travel behaviour, about your opinions, regarding certain transport related things.  It will a discussion from 60 – 90 minutes and as I said your help is very much appreciated. So help yourself to the drinks and the food.  First thing I want to ask you is to have an introduction round.  As I said my name is Moderator, researcher Exeter University.  So,  starting to my left…..
Benjamin: Hi I’m Benjamin.  New to Culhampton.  3 weeks now yeah.  On a sort of mission of discovery. Love it, absolutely love it.  
Moderator: Thank you.
Sophie: I’m Sophie, lived in Culhampton all my life, just come out of college and just thought i would come along.
Moderator: Nice to have you here.
Jenny: I’m Jenny. We’ve been here for 25 years. Now I am retired, living fairly centrally in Culhampton.
Gareth: I’m the other half, so were both retired.  Been here for 25 years.
Joseph: I’m Joseph.  I’ve been in Culhampton for 18 years.
: [person enters room]
Joseph: ……I’m a post man and I like living here.
Timothy: I’m Timothy; I’ve lived in Culhampton all my life.  I thought I would come along what it was about really.
Rosemary: I’m Rosemary.  I’ve lived in Culhampton 11 years now, previously Bradnidge which is just the hill so…moved her to [2.42]
Moderator: .  Can I have your first name and …? So you arrived late on my left
Ross: Ross with a C.
Moderator: You are also from Culhampton?
Ross: Yes we’ve lived here for 15 years.
Laurence: I’m Laurence.  I lived here for 11 years.
Moderator: So everybody has been living in Culhampton for a while.
Sophie: Yeah, once here you can’t get out can you?
Moderator: Ok.  Just one thing. I’ll start with some questions for you and ask you to let one persona t a time speak, that we have it on recording.  Hopefully its Ok, we need to record it, but we want to have your opinions – it’s in no way related to your names, addresses or whatever. So we store it just for the time of the project we are working on and afterwards it will be erased.    So the first question want to ask you is relatively simple – which modes of transport do you usually use and are there any major differences between the way you travel for different purposes – lets think about…some people maybe travel for work, for leisure trips, trips on the weekend for shopping?  Anybody first.
Gareth: I’ll go.  Because we get free bus passes, we’ve abandoned the car really for local shopping.  We go to Exeter on the bus. It’s a superb service so it definitely has kept some cars off the road.  I use a motorbike for local and we use the car for journeys to the family and longer journeys.  Sometimes we go by rail and Berry’s Coach which takes us up to London because our family are….in England are in Essex so it’s a way of getting there.  But alas we usually have to drive there. So that’s the long distance and we always take the car on holiday because you need a car if you are camping.
Jenny: We also use the car for bulky shopping  
Gareth: Yes. Sainsbury every 3 or 4 weeks and she doesn’t go on the motorbike!
Jenny: And I’ve got a bike.
Moderator: Ross is it different for you?
Ross: Yes.  I use the bus mainly.  And sometimes me and my mates use the train to long distance like to Plymouth or Bristol but it’s mainly the bus or I walk. Me and my mates we even walk to Tibberton and back for just something to do.  Obviously you can’t get a bus because sometimes they are like very hour.  The Exeter service is every 15 minutes, should be the same really for the Tibberton service, like very half an hour so you are trying to rush around, and when you get to one bus you have to wait another….[6.04] for another one.
Moderator: Thanks.  By the way help yourself to snacks.  Joseph, do you want something?  …  Timothy, what about you?
Timothy: Well any thing sort of locally, mainly like shopping is done on foot, but don’t use the public transport as much as I should do really but most other journeys are done by car.
Rosemary: When I haven’t got the car.
Timothy: When you haven’t got the car.
Rosemary: Because I mainly drive.
Moderator: Ok so what do you use?
Rosemary: Our little car. We’ve got a little Ka, it’s a small engine, not a guzzler.  So yeah its just short distances like today I’ve been out [6.56] she lives out in the village and I can’t get a bus there even if I wanted to so I have to ….. It’s too far to cycle. I’m not fit enough to cycle that far either.  But yeah it’s the convenience and the time constraint as well.  But it’s mainly car unfortunately.
Moderator: Benjamin?
Benjamin: Well I’m….. Unfortunately it’s a stroke….. I’ve been a biker all my life, I did have a car once, I didn’t like it.  People always wanted lifts and things. They never ask you when you’ve got a big bit of power between your legs.  So because I couldn’t get insurance I had to surrender my licence but they gave me this free travel …. I use this 6 days out of 7, pretty much because at the end of my road, one side of the zebra crossing is Exeter, this side is Willend or Tibberton…er… the real irony is I very seldom go anywhere without my dog.  I go free…but I’ve got to pay for the dig.  Ok!  Its 75p you get an all day ticket and go anywhere. But I do use it very, Very frequently.  And not just within Culhampton.  I go to Plymouth, Exmouth, Barnstable – it all depends on the connections in Paris Street in Exeter.  I also use the train because that’s very accessible – Central station.  Ok you can hop on and off buses but not a great deal else to do with my time.  I did get somewhat incensed on Monday – can’t use this pass before 9.30. And i was stood outside Somerfield and the 1B turned up, and there were about 5 people you see, and it was 29 minutes past.  And ….can’t issue you a ticket, can’t issue a ticket.  An entire bus went from Culhampton to Exeter empty.  So we’re told to try and utilise valuable fossil fuel and…nearly said a swear word….the bus went down the road empty and we had to wait another 20 minutes.  Now, alright somebody somewhere in some Bureaucratic office do not issue a ticket before 9.30, didn’t have to give a reason, so 5 people stood there like a lot of idiots you know, because some petty bureaucrat said you cannot use it until…… I can understand between 8 and 9is – people going to work, children going to school.  People who have got some important reason.  But the majority of people with these passes use them either else or better to do.
Gareth: It was 9 o’clock until last year.
Benjamin: You’re right.
Gareth: And they brought out a national system.  It’s not Devon or…..
Benjamin: No, no. it’s England.  So I got slightly irritated to say the least, but what utter nonsense.  Os you let a whole bus with not a single person n it…….you would have thought….but I had a….Ah, well, I’ve got them, I’ll play them at their own game.  I shall get on at 29 minutes past and ask for a ticket to the next stop which I am quite happy to pay for.  Then when we get there…go and…. There’s more than one way to kill a goat.  But shouldn’t’ that driver have had the savvy…..
Jenny: I presume that this ticket will put the time on?
Gareth: It does yes.
Jenny: And so he would be in trouble.
Gareth: But he could have waited ….
: [all talking]
Benjamin: I am sure he could have made the time up.
Rosemary: I expect by the time he explained it was half past anyway.
Benjamin: Well there were 5 very irate…..
Gareth: Ask to see the rules and by the time he’s done that…..
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks a lot. Sophie?
Sophie: I can’t actually afford to learn to drive yet, so I’ve been using the bus ever since I was 11 year old.  To school, college, everything/.  And now I just use it to get to work.
Jenny: Do you have a bicycle?
Sophie: No.  Parents sold that one.
Moderator: Joseph, I want to add something for you.  Again what mode of transport and is there maybe something….obviously there is something you like about that, bt is there maybe something that you don’t like about the modes of transport you use.
Joseph: Well I walk to work.  I’m fortunate enough – it’s only a 5 minutes walk for me and 5 minutes back obviously. I very rarely use public transport because I don’t find it particulate convenient or cheap.  Having said that the price of fuel now…I have a car, I have my own car, my wife has her own car.  I don’t often use it but I do find it indispensable really because I do odd jobs both for, myself and for people so I need the where withal to go and buy materials and bring it back – it would be difficult. Well impossible to do on public transport.  We do a weekly shop to Sainsbury probably.  When the new Tesco opens and it’s just at the bottom of our lane. So we should even be able to get the trolley and just walk to do the weekly shop.  S its looking good.  Yeah I’ve used the train once last year to go up to Bristol. And that was quite an enjoyable experience really. I quite enjoyed that. I very rarely go on the bus because there’s no point really when I’ve got a car.  I do use a bicycle for short journeys within Culhampton. 
Moderator: OK.  Rosemary?  How are things for you? You like about ht way you travel or you don’t like?
Rosemary: I don’t like the price of fuel.  But…same as everyone.  I like having my car because it’s my control and I know where I’m going and I can take the shortest route, i can leave when I want to leave.  Just sort of the convenience of it all.  And just the same, trying to shop in Exeter and lugging it ..Everything…. I did it at Christmas, I went Christmas shopping on the bus and trying to bring everything back in was an absolute nightmare, whereas if I had got the car, ic an buy a bit, put it back in the care…buy a bit put it back in the car.  So I did it because I thought it would be better than trying park.  Wish I hadn’t.  So it’s the whole convenience and being lazy!
Moderator: Laurence, what about you? Are there maybe thing you like about the way you travel or you don’t like?
Laurence: I don’t know because I haven’t got a job yet.  The bus’s a bit expensive but I am sure once I get a job it will be fine. So I just walk everywhere really most of the time or get lifts with people in a car. So it’s alright.
Ross: There is a problem with one on the buses.  Its alright if you are going to Exeter – if you are going away on a long trip and you ‘ve got to get the train or something like that, it’s fine going to Exeter tog et a train because you can just jump off the bus, or go to central station and jump on another train to the mainline station.  But in Tiverton the buses hardly ever et there.  They either et there just before the train is…literally at the platform and by the time you get off the bus and you get your ticket, the train is gone.  Or it usually gets there as the train is leaving.  It very rarely…I think there’s only one bus a day that actually gets in before the train you need.  Because you can’t…you can get a bus to Exeter but by the time you get off the bus at Exeter and get down you’ve missed the train anyway.
Laurence: There’s hardly any buses to Ufkam and that anyway.
Ross: Yes, especially that time in the morning.  If you need to get a train to work…if you work in Bristol and you can’t get a train, you have to go to Exeter to get it and it’s a bit more expensive if you haven’t got a car or…..
Benjamin: I know a trick there.  Get off at Pinoe, outside that big Chinese restaurant, down there.  Get the Exmouth to Central from Pinhoe, it doesn’t cost anymore. You don’t have to clear the city you go right through to St David’s.
Moderator: Well you have to know that.  Ok.  Thank you very much.  Maybe you can reconsider for me er…. if your travel mode or travel behaviour in general changed during the last months or years, or when did it last change, can you remember that?
Rosemary: Yeah we didn’t have a car for 3 months last year.
Moderator: Why?
Rosemary: It failed its MOT and we couldn’t’ afford at the time to get another car or repair it, so we basically went 3 or 4 months before getting a new car, so that’s why I had to catch the bus Christmas shopping Exeter, no choice.  And yeah you had to just rethink everything and replan, you couldn’t just jump out, get in the car and go somewhere. You had to think Ok where do we want to go.  And plan it.  Plan things.
Laurence: When I used to….i used to get a bus all the time because I was working and now I am unemployed, I can’t get the bus, and I as taking driving lessons, I can’t take driving lessons.  And that makes it harder for me to get certain places.  So basically I am either begging people to give me a lift and I’ve got to pay them petrol money or I am staying around Culhampton and doing nothing.  And you can’t do very much if you’ve got no money so…. But that transport…getting there and back is on the buses sometimes hectic.  There’s so many people getting on at once time.  I had to go from Tibberton to Exeter last week and I got on the bus and there was a queue from the entrance to the bus all the way around the corner. I was at the back and it was only a small bus and he had to fit 50 people on it.  Most of us were standing for a good half hour and the way the buses turn up and expect you to ….. just like, well they expect at [19.08] when they’ve got to get o work and that.  It’s really annoying.
Benjamin: I think if I have any objection at all it’s…… I’m old enough o remember it.  We are unfortunate in that there is one bus company.  They rule.  What they say goes.  Now years ago you had…. From Tibberton you had Tibberton Bus Company, you had Great Western.  I think there were four different companies all vying for the same patronage.  Now you see they’ve literally said take it or leave it.  They’ve put the prices up.  Sometimes I’ve travelled on the 55 from Tibby to Exeter and I swear the bus has got square wheels and how on earth it gets through even the basic MOT – they rattle, they shake, their brakes are something else.  I know there is a pecking order and after a bus has been in Manchester for so long they send it to Bristol and then it goes from Bristol to Taunton and by the time it reaches Tibberton it is only fit for the scrap yard.  But you see, I in fact got rather irate one day and I said, do you know the late Adolph Hitler sent the Jews to the concentration camps in better things than this.  That caused a bit of a row on the bus but … no seriously they are happy to take our money.  Aright-we’ve got passes – the bus company still gets paid.  Where the money comes from is of no concern to them./  it comes from county council. I’ve worked hard all my life and its one of the few things that I’ve got for free.  And yes I do use it.  But I’ve even been told oh you can wait, you don’t pay.  Excuse me?  And then there is the other element. Which I get slightly irritated with.  Which is our eastern European drivers we have now.  That sit behind the little booth and they look at you like you’ve sprouted a second head.  You’ve only asked for a single to Exeter.  I shall be accused of being racist or something I don’t know.  Surely to goodness with unemployment is this country like it is, it is really necessary to employ our eastern European cousins?  There’s no coherence.  You either catch the bus, suffer it or do the other thing.  That’s wrong.  If there was healthy competition….if for example tomorrow morning every Stage Coach bus came out of the depot and pulled up and no one got on by midday they would be ripping their hair out – why is no one catching our buses?  Well you could try cleaning them occasionally, yeah?  you could try teaching you drivers to say please and thank you….
Gareth: Sometimes the drivers are very……
Benjamin: No, they are there for our convenience.
Gareth: Yes I know because my son has said he’s not had the right money and they’ve refused to let him on one day.
all: We’ve had that.  Done that to me.
Laurence: I rode to Tibberton on my bike and just luck always seems to happen to me….. I was coming down the road to the bus station and my back tyre just blew. And there is no way of me getting back.  So I  went to the bus stop and said look, you see my bike, I can’t ride it home.  Where do you live and I said Culhampton and he said oh I’ll have to ring my head office to find out for sure.  And I was there for about a good 10 minutes while he tried to get thought to head office and then he turned around and said no they can’t let you on.  I had to ring borrow money from people just to ring my family to come and pick me up and my dad had to come all the way from Yeovil, all the way down via Taunton in his van to chuck the bike in the back and take me home.  And then had to go all the way to Yeovil because my mum doesn’t drive.
Benjamin: Another real [23.23] I noticed it on Saturday …the bit where the stairs goes up, this company has been entered for the best driver of the year, please vote for us.  Yes sure I will.
Gareth: Actually I’ve found them pretty good on the Exeter run, the buses are better.  They obviously discriminate against Tibberton.
Sophie: They have got some of the newer ones I think. The double deckers.
Benjamin: And I have …. I’m not… fooling around…. I have serious access pRoblems.  Now some of these late Victorian buses …. There are 3 stops.  But there’s a pole up the middle.  For why?  The drivers tell me they are not allowed to get out of their little hatch to assist us  health and safety.
all: [talking]
Laurence: ……… go down to about that far off the ground… and you’re sat at the top of the bus , you are like that!  Go down in the bus and ….
Ross: I think the stupidest thing I have had – when I was at school I was in my school uniform.  I missed the bus to go to school so I got on the bus,. The next one and said return to [24.41][ and he charged me for an adult ticket.
Sophie: They always do that.
Moderator: Really?
Sophie: They used to do that when I was going to primary school as well.
Laurence : But sometimes there’s people that has their bus passes from school. Certain people get bus passes from Wilham to Culhampton and …. Most bus drivers think they are only valid for one route.  you get the odd certain one who will let you on if you missed the bus or [25.04] after school, but usually they charge you.  You show them your bus pas and they say no, I can’t take it because you are not in school uniform,.  When you are in your PE kit and you’ve got your bag on your back and you’re in your rugby shirt.
Benjamin: You’re obviously off to work down the mines aren’t you.
Moderator: Ok thanks a lot everybody.  Joseph, you mentioned something – rise in petrol prices. Did that change something for you or….?
Joseph: Not really.  I don’ drive as fast on the motorway now.  I suppose that’s the main thing.  It’s not as though I use my car an awful lot.  The cost of maintaining the car, insuring it and taxing it. And ok the cost of fuel is sky high but for me it’s still…it’s not large amount….its not the major amount of the actually running costs of the car. You’ve paid all the fixed costs for the car you might as well use it. It doesn’t make sense not to sue it really. If you’ve got a car you might as well use it unfortunately. So, yeah the price of fuel has gone up.  I don’t understand the way the government…. At one time….I’ve got a diesel car and at one time diesel was a lot cheaper than petrol .  Now it’s more expensive.  Why?  Nobody’s…its cheaper to produce, so why is it more expensive?
Ross: They are trying to get say with the cars and that, they’re trying to get people to use green, bio-diesel.  I haven’t seen…there’s very few around this area that people can use.
Joseph: I have used bio diesel and it works fine.  It’s a bit cheaper.  The chap next door had a tank of it.  Unfortunately he’s moved away now.  That was quite handy.  The only thing I meant to say when you asked me about modes of transport, I said I enjoyed using he train.  You still need a car to get to the railway station.
Ross: They took away the one in Culhampton.
Joseph: So they make is so difficult.  They charge for parking, if the car parks full, you see them all parked along the road at Tibberton parkway.  If it’s after dark and you haven’t got your lights on, they’ll clamp you.  They go out of the way to make it as difficult as possible to use public transport.
Benjamin: You’ve got it.
Joseph: So why should we use public transport.  If they made it easy, they say oh they’re hitting the motorists all the time with taxes and that but they don’t give you an incentive.  And its all [27.57]
Benjamin: Nothing to do with the topic, but in a way similar.  To cut down on drink driving.  Right, drink fruit juice, lemonade, coca cola.  It was dearer than beer.  There’s no tax on coca cola.  Its costs about three pence halfpenny a pint to make.  Did the government step in and say no, give them…it’s only soda water and syrup.  You see, you knew… if the government started to give people some sort of incentive….and there’s nothing annoys me more, right – tomorrow you’ve got a day off, you take your wife, we’ll go to Tibberton, we’ll do some shopping.  You have to pay Mid Devon District Council to park in the car park for the privilege of shopping in Tibberton.  So what do you do. You say no. it’s free down Tesco. And now all of a sudden the Chamber of commerce are kicking up also.  No one shops here!  Westex is dead.  Why?  What do you pay 90p an hour for? Have you not paid your road tax, your fuel tax, tax on MOT, on your tyres.  You’re being asked …what is it?  It’s got a name hasn’t it?  A something tax – they sneak it in without you realising.  Stealth tax. No free parking.  Let Somerfield [29.36] let them pay to encourage you to go and park.  Why do you have to get a ticket?  Why employ somebody….your times up, no you must pay.  I’ve already paid.
Gareth: They are talking now as well of charging you to park at work.
Benjamin: You’re joking?  
Gareth: They are thinking of taxing the employers to park.
Ross: Yeah.  That’s what they did with my old job. 
Benjamin: There’s one answer to that, don’t go to work!
Ross: I used to work in MacDonald and they are asking people if you are over there for two hours you’ve got to pay £12.  If you are over that 2 hours by a minute, or 5 minutes or an hour.  Two hours free but… nobody does it unless you obviously go to the lorry park.
Benjamin: So that’s why everyone parks outside my house then?
Laurence: They did it to my friend.  He’s just stated work down there and he’s driving so he parked up and …we call it Stour Park End, but anyone can park there and he comes out from work and he says oh I’ve got a penalty because I haven’t paid my ticket.  They make you give your registration in, and it takes two weeks for that to clear so they know who it is and that and after that you’ve still got to pay £12.  And 3 months ago you never used to have top pay.
Benjamin: Have you ever wondered who gets that £12?
Laurence: The government.  It doesn’t go into our wages or it doesn’t go into anyone elses.
Benjamin: It doesn’t improve things like pavements and drop curbs, although Brampton is pretty good.
Laurence: Yet you get the idiots who go down in their cars on a Thursday, Friday night and just park up in the bottom  - they are there for about 4 hours, with their lights on just listening to music and then just start racing up and down.  You come out from work at 11 o’clock to have a cigarette break or something like that.  And all you can here is boom, boom, boom…. And you think…..
Benjamin: It’s alright if you are in the car!
All: [laughing]
Moderator: Thanks .  I just have to sum some points up.  I think it’s really an interesting discussion.  Slight change of topic.  I want to ask you about your holiday travel. I am especially interested – how often do you gon on holidays and maybe what are your preferred destinations and how do you get there.  Maybe we’ll start with Sophie.
Sophie: Well, my family we usually go on holiday once a year.  Always go aborad because my mum likes to get away from the horrible weather.  And we usually drive up to the airport and park in this car park thing that transports you to the airport.
Moderator: Which airport?
Sophie: We go to either Bristol or Gatwick and there is this place where you can park and they will look after your car and you can be transported to the airport in the morning or whatever.  And we also fly to Newcastle to see our friend as well.  Which is quite bad I know because…. But yeah.  We do that because driving takes too long and there’s too many traffic jams, you use so much petrol then.  And trains are always so crowded, and my mum’s claustrophobic so that doesn’t work either because she has panic attacks.  
Ross: I go on holiday usually to Turkey.  Or France or Germany.  But well when I was a little kid we used to go down to Cornwall, and drive down there on Saturday and come back on the following Saturday. We used to use our car all the time. You can go to different places. In Turkey you can’t.  You’ve got to use their bus service. Don’t get me wrong their bus service…i would class it as one of the best in Europe, its there on time and it gets you there on time.  But it’s really packed and especially when you’ve got to fly down, and you’ve got to drive all the way up to Bristol.  It’s like they’ve….banned the farmers now haven’t they.  Because farmers around Bristol airport, you used to pay a tenner or something and you used to park your car and look after your car.  And now its like you have to park in the airport and it’s like an extra 50 quid a week.  And they are stopping farmers getting a little bit of profit and you don’t think they get enough with all this airplanes going over.
Benjamin: Again for the privilege of parking in a field.
Ross: I’ve got no pRoblem with paying…if I was driving up….
Benjamin: H I would.
Ross: …. Paying 20 quid for 2 weeks just to park my car there.  At least I knew it was going to be safe and at least I know it’s not going to get nicked.
Moderator: Joseph?
Joseph: Holidays yeah.  I go to Spain a lot because we’ve got a holiday home there so we obviously travel to Bristol or Exeter.  If it’s Exeter we can drop someone to drop us off, that’s the best thing, we don’t have to pay to park your car although we have done this .  There’s a place that will take your car and park it at an industrial estate and bring back.  The same at Bristol.  And then, we fly to Spain and then we usually hire a car the other side. Other holidays, yeah sometimes we do weekends away, we’ve got family in Manchester. We usually drive just so we’ve got the car, its must easier to drive around and see different family members.  And drive down tot Cornwall.  So we don’t use the train a lot, really for the reasons I said before – you’ve still got to get to the train station.  And you’ve get the problem parking the car.  The buses aren’t convenient.  So yeah.
Moderator: Thanks.  Jenny?
Jenny: Holidays – we usually go to Brittany with family so that’s the car on Brittany Ferries, because I like the food.  It’s when the holiday starts, you know, we’ve got the car on board and we go and have one of their nice meals.  And we’ve got a daughter in New Zealand and we fly obviously.  That’s always Heathrow.  We usually go by train don’t we?
Gareth: Yeah because it’s not worth going to New Zealand for a coupe of weeks, we go for 4 or 5 weeks.  That’s the only way we’d see our granddaughter.
Ross: You get the train from Tibberton to like Paddington, then you get the Heathrow express…?
Gareth: No.  
Benjamin: Change at Reading.
Gareth: Change at Reading.  Heathrow Express is a rip off. About £28.  It cost us more to go from Paddington top Heathrow than Parkway if we get an advance ticket and of course we get the third off for being pensioners.  It literally is cheaper.
Benjamin: There’s always the Oyster Card.
Gareth: Well you don’t need them now actually.  Because it’s free on the buses.  So it’s worthwhile….
Jenny: We usually have a taxi to Parkway…
Gareth: Because there’s no bus.
Ross: The parking at Parkway [37.17] car park there and you still get people….well, I’m not saying…because I definitely would not park my car on that straight because the amount of people that I…go down there on the bus and you can see the amount of cars that have had their windows smashed in.  I wouldn’t even park it in that car park.  It would have to be somewhere where the security cameras showing every single parked car.  But it’s always packed.  You just think people go there, park their car and then walk home!  They use it as a public car park.
Joseph: Even this new car park is full now is it?  Gets full up?
Ross: Well I’ve seen it mainly full up all of time.
Gareth: It’s about two thirds full usually when you go past.  But we haven’t got any choice really.  We’ve got a granddaughter out there and we go about 18 months?
Jenny: We used to always travel to London by going to Honiton and park in their free car park.  But that is full now and I am sure it is not people travelling on the train.
Laurence: Yeah because Honiton station is like bang [38.20] housing estate so people think…oh free parking.  How are you supposed to know, who ‘s car is who.
Jenny: And there is no way of checking that people have actually bought a ticket to go on the train. Which is a shame because I sooner go that line to London.  It’s a beautiful line.
Gareth: But Heathrow Express is good  Not Heathrow Express, the ….
Jenny: You buy a train ticket through to Heathrow but you have to get off and get on a bus.  That’s good.
Laurence: That’s what i did when I went on holiday to …Dawlish.  We went on the train.  It was with a few mates of ours.  And we ended up having to go to Newton Abbot first just to get to Dawlish because the trains…. Me and my mates were not going to hang around on the train station for 2 hours waiting for the Dawlish train. So we thought we’ll go to Newton Abbot. You have to go past Dawlish and then you have to wait 10 minutes and go back again.  
Benjamin: To let the high speed one through.  And then the chug one comes along.  In fairness to them they are in a no win situation aren’t they. Particularly British Rail.  Unfortunately Joseph believe me if they could they would put a railway line right outside your front door.  And mine!
Joseph: They’ve got one in Culhampton and they closed it down.
Benjamin: That’s the question I was going to ask.  Was it a station or a halt?
Joseph: It was an actual proper station.
Ross: Yeah it was because you had Culhampton, then you had…..
Joseph: When we go to Spain where my holiday home is, it’s on a little urbanisation and there’s a little platform there and they’ve just redone the line. Its only a little line, a little train, to your road to get into Alicante or something, ultra modern, all comes up on electronic display, its normally on time, its all very clean and on time.
Ross: It’s the same in Germany that is.
Joseph: They can do it.  Why can’t they can do it in this country?
Jenny: Who runs it? As a matter of interest.
Joseph: Trans……. Can’t remember the name.  It’s a regional  … I think it might be the Valencia…..
Gareth: I think they’re states [40.21] in Spain aren’t they?
Jenny: We went to Copenhagen. Beautiful transport.  Everything clean.  Run by Arriva.
Gareth: A British company.
Jenny: A British company. Wonderful transportation.
Ross: The German transport is pretty bang on time. But you see, you go down from your hotel, and you walk underneath the subway, and you go up ….the platforms like about big.  And you think you’ve got this electric train coming at high speed and it stops.  And you  look at it and you think…excuse me…it’s like expensive and you think they’d like do the train sup.  But here’s graffiti all over them.  And then you get into the German main station, because they hae little ones and they have the main one.  And you look at the other trains and they’ve go this double decker train and you’ve never seen on in your life.  You’ve got to walk up a ramp to get into…. The head room is about that.  You’re sat like that.  Your head is literally touching the top of the train and you can feel it moving.  Well my dad was. He was like…..
Benjamin: I think one of the most enjoyable train companies was Tunisia.  But they are clever you see.  Anything to pull the tourists.  Well it’s a but, but it’s on our favour.  The good trains are for tourists only.  The locals use cattle trucks I think.  But they’ve specifically … and you don’t have to actually show your passport but we Brits in Northern Africa, they twig it, English, Anglais.  No they’ve ast down and they’ve thought it through.  If we want to win people over…for example, back to buses, i know you are on trains at the moment.  I was stood last Saturday on Paris Street bus station and I remember that being built after the Blitz.  I remember it being built.  It was built a temporary measure.  The disabled toilet is underground.  When you get to the toilets, where quite frankly i wouldn’t bother. I’d go in a café or a restaurant, if they cleaned them, right.  Not me, we English will put up with them, we’ll queue for an hour for a banana. Well we did in the war.  But what then happens when the National Express pull in and are foreign visitors whose money we desperately need, what must they think?  Now when years ago, there was a man permanently going up and down with a little brush picking up rubbish, there was baskets of….there’s was even music playing.  It’s like Colditz there.  Its cold concrete.  When was somebody last giving it a lick of paint.  Not us.  We just accept oh well this is England, what do you expect.  What sort of impression then do our foreign visitors have.  We’ve saved all year to come here.  Glorious Exeter, historic Exeter, we’ll go and see the cathedral.  And they pull in tow hat?   
Laurence: Load of kids at on the grass, smoking away.  I’m not one of them!
Benjamin: Well, you can’t do much about that. What I am saying is, from my perspective, Stage Coach are bloody greedy.  They grab, grab, grab, give nothing back.  Their café down there.  I went in again last week, a mug of coffee - £1.90.  I’ve drunk better washing up water.  £1.90.  
Joseph: The café at Paris Street used to be absolutely wonderful.
Moderator: The coffee today is for free…you can….!
Benjamin: But not…… I know now, I shall never buy it again for obvious reasons.  But again what if we’re trying to desperately claw in more business, particularly from a foreign……I say foreign, anyone outside England.  Somebody from Northern Ireland.
Joseph: Even anyone from outside of the county.
Benjamin: Particularly the Cornish, but we won’t go there.
Jenny: Anybody who will come and spend money.
Benjamin: Yeah exactly.  Anybody.  As long as its cash money.  Why then can’t those who I presume things like the bus stations and that….they must be licensed.  Why can’t the authority whatever it is…probably not on this planet but who authorises the licence – do they check on these things?  Do they actually go around and see how difficult it is for disabled people. I get off the bus , breaking my neck because my bladder is not…. You don’t want to know that…… but I’ve got to go on a three mile jaunt and fight my way through, and by the time I get to the gents I have had a accident more than once.  There is a perfectly good disabled toilet with a ramp on the bus station, next to the ticket office.  I got excited about it one day, did I ever.  And I saw an inspector and he said its nothing to do with us, it’s to with Exeter city council.  We lease the building off Exeter city council. So i thought right, I’ve got a good hour until my next bus, go across the road into city Council offices. Who is responsible for the toilets?  They lease the entire block including the café, the toilets, the approach road, the car park down under. Everything.  So I went back and I found this guy, and I said ….i won’t say the exact words I said.  I said you are a confounded liar.  You get off the bus, you’re breaking your neck for a pee, you go in the drivers – they’ve got their own café and ….me?  I’ve got to go half way to bloody Honiton and back!  So, you really get oh….we care.  Will you vote for us for the best bus company? Of course I will yes.  No problem.  Is this getting you anywhere by the way or ?
Moderator: Yes, it’s really….i sometimes have to push a little bit back to the topic but it’s an important topic for us too definitely.
Joseph:  But like you say, they take a lot and they don’t give very much back.  The amount of money this government is making on fuel tax.  What have they done with it?  What have they invested it in?
Benjamin: Well the queen had two new hats and anew pair of gloves and that had to pay for. And  Buckingham palace has got to be re-wired.  
Joseph: New wallpaper for the Lord Chancellor.
Benjamin: Absolutely.  Only £4000 a roll wasn’t it?  Cheap rubbish.  Come round my house.  
Moderator: Sorry to interrupt but…slight change back to holiday travel maybe? I would ask Timothy, what about your holiday travel ?
Timothy: Well mainly recently we’ve been going to North Devon but that does mean us driving.  In the past we have gone abroad, flying from Bristol and we have got taxis there.  but our first time aborad together we did take the train to Gatwick and it wasn’t too bad going up there I didn’t think, but obviously when we came into land, there’s nothing we can do about it, but we landed at 4.30am and the next train wasn’t until 8am so we had a wonderful like 3 ½ hours waiting around Gatwick airport, absolutely knackered because we’d been turfed out of our hotel room at 12 o’clock in the afternoon….
Rosemary: The day before!
Timothy: And so that’s kind of put us off the rail travel to an airport.  But I think the taxi, the price there and back was about the same as it would have cost to park our car in one of these farm places and not in the actual airport parking, which is extortionate.  
Rosemary: And one time we did go with my parents, obviously that was four of us in the taxi so that cut down on the shared price of the taxi.  And another time a friend dropped us up there and back and chuck him a few pounds.
Gareth: It doesn’t pay us to go by train because there’s two of us.  It’s actually cheaper to use the car because of the cost, even with a third off, unless we plan it weeks in advance and get the Apex ticket and you’re absolutely restricted to a single train.
Jenny: So if anything went wrong and you had to get another train….
Ross: Yeah I know what you mean.  It’s happened to me loads of times.  Me and my mates we wanted to ring up to get our tickets the day before, because we knew exactly where we were going, we knew exactly the times.  So I rang them up, and said can I book my ticket via phone.  No, you have to do it online.  But you get someone who…I don’t know, it’s not in Britain, you get someone on the phone, it’s not in Britain and they just tell you.  And you are trying to understand them and you go over it and it’s like £1 or £2 a minute.  
Gareth: But if you book online it comes by post so it’s absolutely no use, you need to have booked three weeks really to….
Joseph: Yeah, I don’t know why they do that because National Express you can print and e-ticket. And show the driver.
Jenny: I think the main problem is obviously the link . You know, you might have a good bus service, you might’ve a good train service but…..
Sophie: But they don’t linkup together.
Joseph: From your door to your destination, there’s a lot of steps
Jenny: Yes.  It’s the link that’s difficult.  And that’s where the car comes in because you don’t have a link so it’s almost like the trains and the bus companies don’t talk to each other, so say, all they need is like you extra 10 minutes, bus comes in, then you’ve got your train there rather than….
Ross: Yeah, show up on the platform and here comes the train.
Jenny: Or they just sit there until [50.52]
Gareth: And a quarter of the cost of getting up to London if we go by train is the taxi for the first 5 miles.  The links are just all wrong.
Laurence: I think the only time the bus company and the train service actually talk to each other is when there is a problem on the line.  Because you turn up at Tibberton Parkway and there’s one, two, three Stage Coach buses, like all the coaches they have.  Every time you see them they are in the depot. And then you get like all different coach companies there.  And you think well can’t they at least talk to each other and you can get an extra 10 minutes to get on that train.
Joseph: In Spain, it you get a train….we had a link, you get off  the tram and get on the train, and they always used to wait for the tram and they wouldn’t go until you go there.  Now it goes through. But they don’t seem to be able to do that in this country.
Laurence: Every time I’ve been on holiday it’s been fine actually.  Well apart from Heathrow airport is a bit sort of down compared to foreign ones.
Ross: Oh yeah that’s a good point actually.  You go into like…you go into a Turkish airport and everyone is so happy.  All the duty free people are like come into my shop and now you think I’ve just had this for two weeks can’t you just give me a break?  Because you go to Turkey and they just ask you constantly to come into their shop.  And you think, oh you come in and everyone is happy and you go into Exeter airport and you’ve got the customs bloke like that.
Joseph: You can’t bring that bottle of water through here.
Laurence: And you’ve got your two section s haven’t you?  What’s the point of giving someone a choice of like is there anything to declare.  Who’s going to declare anyway?
Benjamin: Well honest people do it.
Laurence: Honest people do it.  The sort of people who go through sweating like hell and they are like,….. And they just let them go through.  I just don’t understand that customs bit.
Benjamin: Well you can say about… you live in Spain, say on the French border.  You wake up one morning and the Missus…we’ll go shopping in France.  Yeah we’ll go shopping in France.  So you get in the car, load up the kids, the dog and all this business, you drive into France, spend your euros, same currency.  [53.21] no fill up because the petrol’s a bit cheaper.  You come back into Spain.  No passport.  We’re members of the common market.  I’m told, and I’ve only discovered this recently – you don’t need a passport to get out of Britain, you need one to get back in.  Are we in the common….where’s the common bit of it?  Brussels get's billions and zillions a year. That’s why bread costs £1.30 a loaf today.
Gareth: Yeah.  Britain refused to sign the agreement though.
Benjamin: But I have to have a bit of paper to get back into my country.  The Spanish can go the France, the French can go to Italy, to Germany.  Nobody bothers.
Gareth: We wouldn’t sign because they were worried about the immigration…
Benjamin: Look where that got us!  What is it…after the horse has bolted? Rivers of Blood.
Ross: It’s like that…if you get on a plane to…. Do you have to show your passport when you got the Newcastle?
Sophie: No you can use a driver’s licence.
Ross: Because I had to show my passport when I went to Manchester.  And they kept me at Exeter airport for 5 minutes looking at my passport because I  was [54.40] and they were looking like that…
Benjamin  : Were you trying to buy booze.
Laurence: No.  I was just literally trying to et to Manchester.
Benjamin: You don’t need a passport to go to Manchester.
Ross: Well they asked me for a passport – I flew from Norwich to Exeter.
Benjamin: You’re joking?
All: It’s ID.  Yeah.
Ross: The stupidest thing was, they took a picture of me on a different total thing.  They made me take shoes, everything  off.  Quite literally.  Put it on a conveyor belt, went through this thing, but I’m flying inside my country, not outside.
Benjamin: Exactly you don’t need a passport to go…..
Sophie: If you just walk on a train then you’d be fine.
Ross: [55.12] go to Bristol [55.13] here’s my passport.  Can I have my visa until I get in London.
Benjamin: I was worried abut going to Cornwall.  That Somerset definitely out now.  No way am I going to Somerset if they did that to you/  Where is it going to end then?  Probably not.
Ross: Yet they still have to stamp your passport.
All: [laughing]
Moderator: I am just concerned about the time.  Thank you very much everybody.  I have to mention another point. The sustainable travel is sometimes use.  Anybody understand what that maybe means.  
Benjamin: Bio fuel?
Moderator: For instance bio fuel. Gareth what do you think?
Gareth: Well no transport is ever going to be sustainable.  It’s a contradiction in terms.  It’s got to use some energy.
Jenny: I mean you walk you use shoe leather!
Benjamin: And you wear the pavements out.
Gareth: If you use a bike there’s a cost of producing the bike and so on.  It’s just a question …. I mean our long haul to New Zealand is pRobably the biggest disaster of all but we accept that we just have to do it.
Ross: You can’t exactly help it can you?  
Gareth: Either that or you don’t see you grandchildren grow up.
Ross: What they should do with that is they should just bring out a plane that can take on that amount of fuel just to get there.  Not have to stop off at Singapore then Australia just to get there.  
Gareth: So we do a lot of cycling. It just ranged from that.  But there’s nothing…. You just have to sort of draw the graph.  It does make us think, we deliberately go on the bus, not just because it’s free but to avoid using the car.
Benjamin: So how then you do ….not you personally but how does one justify the leader of the opposition cycling to his work with his chauffeur driven Rolls behind him.  Now is that not a poke with a sharp stick?  
Ross: [57.26] going through a red light?
Moderator: That’s’ politics.
Benjamin: You say that’s politics.  It is politics. We pay them and pay them well. Now back in the 18th century politicians were not paid. It was an honour, it was a privilege.  Alright you’d got the ruling classes.  Is it any different now?
Gareth: The only [57.47]
???: [57.49] £750 for a TV.
Benjamin: But if we go…. And they wonder why there is apathy with elections. If we go along and elect these people in, trusting theme to take care of …I stress OUR money, the government doesn’t own a paper clip. We entrust them and we see how they abuse it.  So come the next general election, we say oh well it doesn’t really matter who I vote for – they’ll do whatever they want to do anyway.  Exactly.  I’ll correct you there, because you say it is political but surely transport is political.
Gareth : That’s the problem.
Benjamin: This morning on BBC news, the blonde git, the now Lord Mayor of London.  Boris Johnson.  He has cancelled this £25 which Ken Livingstone was about to bring in before he got….£25 for the privilege of driving passed the Houses of Parliament.  It’s mine!  Buckingham Palace is mine!  The Palace of Westminster is mine!  Why should I have to pay £8.50 to go into Buckingham Palace which is mine. Don’t come round my house because its start at £10 a visit.  Cream tea on the lawn , extra.  You say political.  It is political.  
Gareth: As I said they haven’t invested the money….into the public transport system.  Like they have in other countries.
Benjamin: Not a bean.  Exactly and how many cars….does her majesty the queen have at her disposal?
Joseph: Well I don’t know but….there’s no other country in the world, let alone Europe that can have a public transport system that is self financing.  It’s got to be subsidised,  you’ve got to put the infrastructure down.
Benjamin: Well that used to be the case.  Well when I lived up in North Devon.  There was a little bus company called Finners.  And they ran, I mean some of their buses took the troops to the first world war. They were a little bit….. they say whatever the big boys do, we’ll knock a penny off.  And people would deliberately stand there whilst the national bus came through and wait for old Finners to save a penny.  It wasn’t to save a penny.  It was to save that little company.  Local people, people they went to school with, knew their dad, and their granddad.  Who is Stage Coach?  It’s some [60.332] thing up in Scotland apparently who ‘s got money oozing out of her ears, it’s an Australian company if I’m ….
Gareth: No, it’s Scottish.
Benjamin: Is it Scottish? 
Jenny: It’s a brother and sister.  They seem to be a little bit odd. They seem to make an awful lot of….and it’s their life.  Their life is stagecoach they built it up from probably a little bus like Finners.  And now they’ve got everything….
Ross: They’ve got Stage Coach all over.
Joseph: It’s strange that we’ve only got one bus company.  Everything else is sort of …. You know, the rains, the post office,. The energy companies, they’ve all diversified, so why haven’t got several bus companies.
Gareth: If you have a free market and you can end up with a winner and that’s it and even Cooks, you know, the local little buses they’ve gone to Stagecoach.
Benjamin: They’re still using the same livery thinking they’ll fool us, but every body knows.
Gareth: [61.36] see a Stage Coach.
All: [talking]
Benjamin: No they come along and wave money in front of people and say look, ready cash.  Lots of notes, take it, take it.
Joseph: It was supposed to be a free market [61.49] a monopoly but that is the way it often goes.
Laurence: What was stage Coach before?
Gareth: It was just a little Scottish transport company.
Laurence: Down in here in Culhampton it was….
Gareth: It was Devon General
Laurence: Yeah you used to have the 373 to Tibberton …..
All: [talking]
Gareth: Stage Coach used to be a coach run by four horses.  It did and that was the way you travelled from one end of the country to the other.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks.  We’ll just push a little bit back to the topic.  It’s still the topic, some of it.  And it’s really interesting.  Just to give an explanation, sustainable travel obviously means environmentally friendly transport and using maybe long lasting energy and keeping the world for further generations and things.  So you already told me a lot about these things, and maybe you can think about what would be necessary to attract you in person to change your ravel behaviour towards more sustainability.
Benjamin: Canal boats.
Ross: Canal boats?
Benjamin: We had the finest canal system in the world at one time, back in the industrial revolution. Oh yes. One horse could move thousands of tonnes of coal from here to…. It was an amazing network and then some foolish Cornish man went and invented the steam engine.  And that blew that out of ….
Gareth: 2 miles an hour to go and see my brother in Cumbria, would take 6 months!
Benjamin: Yes, but…..
All: [talking]
Ross: It still is, it still is.  I’ve been on a canal boat, its lovely.  You just sit back.  It’s not being in a car….
Sophie: Yes, but our country’s too….it moves too fast now, everyone moves to fast….
Laurence: Yeah you can’t go on a canal boat to work.
All: {talking}
Moderator: Sorry, just one person please.
Sophie: There’s not really room for like the relaxed pace of life anymore so…
Moderator: So its all about time and money?
Sophie: Yes it is now.  Because lives t work instead of works to live.  So that’s the way it is really.
Benjamin: There are exceptions there.
Sophie: Well yeah but I mean generally in the country everyone requires to have quick transport everywhere.
Benjamin: You’ve got Big Brother watching you and clocking on machines and all this rigmarole.
Gareth: There’s got to be public transport but you’ve heard peoples complaints of lack of joined up [64.12] and if there was a station in Culhampton they could run little trains from Taunton top Exeter that stopped at every farm house almost, you know like they used to.
Benjamin: Yeah, they called them holts didn’t they? Well they did in my day.  You literally waved the train down.  If there was nobody on the platform the train would…
Gareth: We’d certainly use those so…I mean the key is public transport that’s worthwhile but for most of this area there isn’t any public transport at all.  Live up the Culne Valley.
Laurence: Like I say if you try to get to Honiton on the bus, it’s once… yeah…
Gareth: Comes round once in the morning, comes back once in the evening.
Laurence: It’s something like if you get that bus, the Cooks it’s something like 8.30am and you’ve got to be there all day unless you get a connection from Honiton to Exeter.  
Joseph: I drove into Exeter and then out again.
Laurence: But that wastes more time.
Benjamin: And of course if you write to the Public Transport Users – because I think it’s Southampton or Bournemouth, and I have written tot hem.  Hey write back and say take it or leave it.  That is their attitude.
Joseph: That’s why people use the car.  
Benjamin: Exactly.
Joseph: They’re not taking it.
Jenny: The rural area I don’t think you can hae a working public transport.
Sophie: No, because it would ruin it wouldn’t it?
Benjamin: But what about places in North Wales where the post van picks people up and takes them in.  In a little like a transit.  Well the post has to come everyday anyway and if you are at that phone box he’ll take you in and…..
Jenny: Yes, but who will bring you back.  Because he doesn’t come back for a second delivery?
Benjamin: To empty the post boxes ,he has to.
Gareth: They do it in Cumbria but its one a day.
Laurence: If you did that round here you’d get arrested and have your licence taken off you for carrying……
Benjamin: And another thing,. All up through Snowdonia , you’ve got . … a bit like the Cooks one, take your push bike on the bus.  And he’ll pretty much…provided its safe, drop you off, and you go off an d ride up a mountain , whatever people d – seems like total madness to me, anywhere, if  you are there when he comes back, a ring and ride, for disabled people.  Yeah, I have to pay but come on, nothing is free.  You say this isn’t [66.39] in the rural areas.  I think the potential is there but I think it is because, as you rightly said , open your front door.  Ssssh, into your little pod, you little cell, go where you like, when you like.  But I’m sure this is rapidly becoming a thing of the past.  You simply will not be able to hop to Sainsbury’s.  Come to Somerfield, spend £25 they’ll bring it to your door.  You don’t need your car.
Rosemary: Well it’s the same with any.  Tescos, go online, and have them dropped off.
Benjamin: So it begs the question why then drive to Sainsburys, when the bus from the end of my road stops at Sainsbury’s in Pinhoe.
Jenny: It does yes.
Laurence: You get people driving to Tesco in Culhampton if they live two doors up the road.
Timothy: Our next door neighbour, not so much now but when we first moved. There is a little kind of walkway between our houses and what was Brocks, is now Costcutter – he used to get in his car and drive round to pick up his newspaper and drive back.  It must have been really heavy!
Benjamin: And why do you need a…..
Sophie..: …. Fresh air.
Rosemary: We would walk though and when he leaves at the same time and obviously we would get there like before him!
Benjamin: Why do you need a four wheel drive Range Rover with spray on mud from Halfords – true?  You can buy cans of spray on mud…..it’s never seem mud!  To drive Hermione 400 yards down the road to school.  When I was a kid I walked 32 miles to school.  No, Hermione has to go to her violin lessons, and I have to drive her to the pony club.  The child is obese, is it any wonder?  Why have legs, you know?  Now you see, this is the people, of course we’ve got a large Range Rover – it’s not paid for it’s on the club book.  They live on kippers, they do.  To try and impress the neighbours.  They do.  Wait till the bank reclaims it and then they won’t be able to afford a bloody skateboard.  Then Hermione, will have to walk to school and that will get rid of some of gut won’t it?
Moderator: OK.  Thank you very much.
Sophie: Did that answer your question?
All: [Laughing]
Moderator: Pretty good actually.
Benjamin: You’ll think twice before you have another one of these.
Gareth: You’ll think twice who you invite anyway!
Moderator: Randomly selected people so…. You have to deal with it!  Anyway,
Gareth: Maybe should be a  bit less random I think!
Moderator: No, it’s really helpful.  Thank you very much.  
Benjamin: You’ve got to go back and chew through all this lot.  Try and make some semblance of order of it.
Moderator: Oh it works.  
Benjamin  : Does it?
Moderator.: Yes.  Last point regarding sustainable travel.  We’ve heard a  lot about public transport and these things.  Do you think you can also include people’s holiday travel and then maybe force them or somehow ask them to change their holiday travel,  fly less or maybe fly not that often.
Benjamin: I don’t think there’s going to much option, because again this morning on the BBC, BAA – British airport Authorities are sticking on another £44 per family surcharge.
Timothy: Is that for long haul?
Benjamin: No, no.  Europe.  Sure.  £44.  So you get Brigit Rail to the airport, luggage and all this funny hats and hat sort of business.  You’ve bought your ticket, you’ve paid your insurance, you’ve got your foreign currency.  Sorry, another £44 .  Well make it £444 then.  Just stick noughts on it like the Italians do with the Lira, or what was the Lira.  At what stage is the great Brigit public… the late Sir Winston Churchill, God bless him, going to get up off their backside, show a bid of backbone and say no.  Cornwall is beautiful.  Scotland is beautiful. The Republic of Ireland is stunning.  Why go to Benidorm?
Joseph: Because it doesn’t rain is the answer.
Benjamin: Are you implying in Devon?
All: [talking]
Rosemary: But also a lot of its price with the holidays…a holiday over here can cost more….we went like 2 days to Woolacombe and we probably got a week for that, in Turkey or somewhere.
Benjamin: Those days are gone Rosemary.  My honeymoon was a week in Venice and I thought I was being ripped off.  17 pounds 10 shillings all in.  Good Lord , what do they want?  17 pounds 50 for a week!  That included the transfer.  I thought we were being done, I really did. Mind you this was back in the dark ages.
Jenny: At the moment though….that might come…but at the moment if you pop into the local travel agents, you’ve still got lots of good deals that would make it cheaper.  They’re going to Ireland.  Ireland the last time we looked [72.22]
Timothy: Hugely expensive. It’s the most expensive place in Europe.
Benjamin: Yeah but look what you get.
Laurence: Great beer!
Moderator: Yes that’s right.  Joseph?
Joseph: I think as fossil fuels get more expensive and there are less of them, they are going to have to come up with other technologies to travel to those places I think.
Benjamin : What about you then long-term?  Your holiday home, as a bequeathment to your children or grandchildren?
Joseph: Sell it.  Pay the mortgage off.
Benjamin: Is that a possibility?
Joseph: Oh yeah.
Benjamin: If somebody couldn’t afford….. its not maintaining the properties , its getting there.
Joseph: Well it’s not as cheap as it was, but it’s not bad.  I mean, normally you can get a flight for about £100 return from Exeter or Bristol.  
Benjamin: Today you can.
Joseph: Yeah you can.  Not whenever you want, but if you book it well in advance , you know when you want to go.  I mean Ryan Air fly from Newquay to Alicante now and they do cheap fares.  Ok, you’ve got to get to Newquay but….
Ross: It’s all these regional airports though isn’t it?  You’ve got like….5 within a radius of 100 miles and there’s no need for them.  Just build one bang in the middle where it’s about the same distance to get there.
Benjamin: No, no.. because then the people in Barnstable are going to moan and say I’ve travel 70 miles to get to the regional airport.
Jenny: Then the people at the regional airport moan because they say we’re getting all these extra flights.
Benjamin: Can’t get any sleep because there’s planes flying over all the time.
Ross: They should never have made Exeter international I think.
Benjamin: Well I don’t know.
Rosemary: I think it’s a good thing because you can get more flights to more places.
Benjamin: No, that  a decoy.  That was in the event of an emergency, jumbos can land there.  PRobably might not be able to make it to Heathrow.  That was that was about.  As is RFA chivner.
Timothy: Concorde can land there.
Laurence: Concorde did land there.
Moderator: Really?
Benjamin: That’s where really it got its initial status.  I know it’s gone but then again.  I think the answer is build a run way, a tube station, a canal and a railway line right through my back garden and I shall never complain.  That’s not going to happen is it?
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks a lot.  Last issue on my list.  Environmental friendly behaviour at home.  We’re backing… so to say back from transport.  What do you do to behave more environmentally friendly at home.  Can you think of something?
Ross: I recycle my vegetable oil.
Moderator: Recycling. That’s one thing.
Gareth: We’ve got solar panels to heat the hot water.
Benjamin: Do they work?
Gareth: Yeah when the suns out.
Laurence: Yeah when the suns out…..
All: [talking]
Benjamin: I sleep with the dog instead of heating hot water bottle.
Moderator: Really?  So you are saving energy.
Benjamin: Indeed I am.
Rosemary: Definitely the switching off things.  Off standby and unplugging things.
Benjamin: These low energy things…
Rosemary: Oh yes we’ve had low energy… yeah…
Benjamin: ……from NPower.
Rosemary: I’m very lucky that a friend of mine… her husband used to work for one of the electric companies. And at one point several years ago they were giving them away free, so we had a stash, which has just run out.
Benjamin: I’ve got 4 come from Npower this morning.
Sophie: Yeah they’re giving them away now.
Benjamin: But as somebody else to me……was it you Timothy?  Apparently disposing of these is a problem because of the gas in them.
Timothy: There’s mercury in them so it’s lethal.
Benjamin: So you can’t just throw them in the trash?
Timothy: Shouldn’t do.  Nobody’s really ….
Joseph: [76.19] I didn’t know that so….. disposing of….
Gareth: Your supposed to…anything like that you are supposed to be able to take them back where you bought it from and they are supposed to take it off you.
Benjamin: I’ve no idea where they came from.  But I am very fortunate because outside my front door literally is a yellow street light and outside my back door it a white street light.  I thought it was the moon the first night I moved in there.  Its broad daylight in …. I never switch the lights on.  What?  When they are already flooding through… I mean I’ve got to make sure I wear a dressing gown when I run around the house. The neighbours can always move can’t they if they don’t like it?
Ross: That’s a good point actually because when i lived in Bristol, you’ve got those old Victorian lights, and there’s one pretty much outside every house.  They light the street and you are sat in your room and its just light straight in and they are taking them down and putting the ones that go up above your house.  And its 6 o’clock at night and its dark where the light gone?  Because you’re used to it just coming straight in through your window.
Benjamin: Another thing.  Why boil a big kettle of water when you only want that much.
Rosemary: Oh yeah.
Benjamin: I actually take a mug of water and tip it in the kettle.
Gareth: Or microwave.
Benjamin: That’s a good idea.
Jenny: My nephew…. Gareth’s nephew actually has just bought a new house that’s obviously built to all these new standards and they were saying, this is the middle of winter and it’s Barrow on Furness and its cold isn’t it?  The wind blows there.  And they come home, the central heating is on. 7 o’clock they switch it off because they are so hot.  The insulation is so good.
Benjamin: How much was in my loft when you went up the other day?  You said it was double what it should….?
Timothy: It was on.. actually on the floor.. and the ceiling and there was dual layered.  And they were actually up in the apexes was actually insulated as well.
Benjamin: And the newest things now is triple glazing, coming down from Scandinavia.  It’s bad enough cleaning two windows let alone cleaning three.
Ross: You can get those self cleaning ones though now can’t you?
Moderator: Really.
Gareth: Our house is an insulated as it can be but it was built in 1930 so the things that… I mean we would have to pull up the floors to put under the insulation there. And the cost of that , environmental and so top do it….
Benjamin: Mine is 1970 I think.  Its council property and credit to them.  They have really gone all the way – it’s warm, double glazing, draught excluders, flabby things under the door. And they’re….. I think it was pRobably EEC regulations. F  but they’ve done it anyway.  I wait to see what happens come the winter.  Fortunately I don’t felt the cold but….
Gareth: We notice the difference when we got the house.  It used to be sealed windows, you know….
Benjamin: Oh yes.  Horrible damp things.
Gareth: The double glazing….
Joseph: Water used to run down in side.
Gareth: Yeah.  I mean the difference with insulation……
Benjamin: Did you get government assistance?
Gareth: Not for that.
Jenny: That was a long time ago.
Benjamin: Because you can now can’t you?
Rosemary: Yes, my friend had that. She’s in private rented bungalow and because she’s on her won , they basically paid to insulate the building.  All she had to have was the landlord’s permission.  And the difference in there, like you say, even in the summer it’s so much hotter.  And in the winter, she’s got like night storage, so she doesn’t have to have it as high.  And it’s surprising.  We were actually surprised in the difference just having the walls and that done.
Benjamin: And this is the thing about turning the thermostat down.  It only needs a couple of clicks.  Ok so about 9 o’clock it gets a bit chilly.
Rosemary: Out a jumper on!
Benjamin: Put a rug round your shoulders.  If it’s that cold, find a woman and go to bed.
Joseph: [80.27] these individual radiator thermostat valves.
Rosemary: I must admit ours is at the bottom of the stairs . So upstairs is really hot and downstairs can be cold.  
Gareth: You can get a grant to get theses individual ones. It maybe turned 60.  I don’t know.
Jenny: The other thing is….. my mother had an electric fire that had very effective false coal.  And she used to just put the light on!  And she said I feel warm.  Look at it , it feels warm.
Benjamin: Known as the placebo effect.
Jenny: It doesn’t use much electricity as actually putting the fire on.
Timothy: It’s like people buy DVDs of a fire going.
Benjamin: Yeah.  I’ve had my sleeping tablet I’m bound to go to sleep.  Actually it was an aspirin, but as long as it helps me sleep.
Gareth: Recycling is a total mess here.  I think it’s very good in Mid Devon.  I like these brown bins because we’ve got a big garden and so on.  But then we go up  to our son's in Essex and they will take drinks bottles but not something – you can’t put out garden waste, and then we were in Kent…..
Jenny: And the boxes were a different colour.  And that threw us completely.
Gareth: And you had to…. They wouldn’t accept toilet roll centres in the cardboard because it had already been recycled so you had to…..
Benjamin: Go to {Jericho?] which is a region  of oxford.  9 different coloured boxes.  You have to take half a day of work to….
Gareth: It really does need sorting I think so that there’s a national standard.  So we all know what we are doing.
Timothy: The company that I used to work for, we built the recycling wagons for South Moulton.  And when they started going on about what was happening in this area, it was like, well if they can do it…. South Molten they took everything.  From day  one.  Well, no i think they waited a little bit then they did the milk ones.  They were taking plastic…. And you know, we have to drive to Tibberton tip to actually take drinks bottles.  Or they go in the bin.
Benjamin: Take them down Somerfield and chuck them in….
Ross: You are not allowed to put food waste in, say you left a bit of food on the plate. You are not allowed to put that in the bin anymore, you’ve got to put it in the little brown bin.
Benjamin: Get a Jack Russell, you need never throw……
All: [laughing]
Timothy: Another thing that we’ve done with recycling recently is we have actually got a composter. 
Rosemary: We’ve started growing vegetables.  
Timothy: We got fed up with our little patch of grass and we’ve dug it up and stated a vegetable garden.  A bit more self sustaining.
Benjamin: Good on you.  We did it in the war…….
Rosemary: [83.22] big round bin now and he goes out pRobably about once a month, but it doesn’t have enough in it to warrant putting it out every 2 weeks and it’s only the meat [83.32] actually smell that bad.
Benjamin: …..[overtaking] public parks, flower beds, even the gardens in Buckingham Palace were turned over for potatoes and Swedes else we'd starve. 
Gareth: We barely fill a black bag now every fortnight with composting everything for the garden.  We don’t put cooked food because we are scared of rats and such.  But that brown bin is great.  I really do like that system.  
Ross: Well they give you those bags don’t they.  If you tie it up, and then you….because I’ve got tot walk through my garden and all the way down load of stairs to get to the front door.  
Rosemary: Yes I must admit, the biodegradable bags aren’t brilliant.
Ross: ….. Goes straight through.  You’ve got about 4 or 5 bags in it just to keep it from falling out.
Timothy: Yes,  just a little tiny drop of moisture in there and that’s it.  It disintegrates.
Benjamin: There made of flour?
Timothy: Yeah corn flour.
Gareth: Corn starch.
Timothy: Corn starch, that’s it.
Benjamin: I’m lucky really because I take a trip each day or most days across to Somerfield, it’s literally the other side of the road.  And on the kitchen door, bottles, cans, paper, thin card, whether it comes from a toilet I don’t know.  And in Somerfields car park are these….
Rosemary: They don’t have plastic….
Benjamin: I don’t know I just chuck it in with the…. I worked that one out you see.  They crush the glass and they melt it.  And the plastic will get melted along with the glass won’t it?
Gareth: It will pollute the glass.  They won’t be able to use it.
Timothy: Well I don’t think they will with the glass but I know that steel and aluminium you should separate.
Benjamin: Can plastic be reused?
Gareth: Yes it can be shredded.
Timothy: Some plastics yes.
Moderator: One last question for you sorry.  But we have nearly used our 90 minutes.  You mentioned a lot things –recycling, switching of the lights, saving energy. Do you think it’s necessary to do these things in these days?
Benjamin: Not for us, but for our children and our grand children . We’ve had our day.  Youngsters.  These young people.  [85.38] more mature status –we’ve had our day.  Go out on a  Saturday night with ten bob – that 50p in your pocket.  Go to the pictures, buy  10 woodbines and have enough for a bag of fish and chips going home, for 50p.
Laurence: I wish we could do that now.
Benjamin: No you wouldn’t.  Because I tell you for why.  Very simply, you’ll learn this as you get older.  The average wage was £3.50 a week. So that Saturday night out was a seventh of your weekly wage.  So really we’re better off now financially then we’ve ever been.
Gareth: I think just getting back to the question, I think the food producers could do a lot with the packaging [86.17]
Joseph: Oh absolutely yeah.
Benjamin: Why wrap a swede in cling film.
Joseph: I mean it’s like trying to get into Fort Knox sometime – you need a Stanley knife.  
Ross: You et these ready meals don’t you.  And you've got to take the cardboard off the top, slide it off, take the plastic film off.  You ‘ve got to take another plastic film of the little dip you’ve got.  Then you’ve got to put the plastic film back on..
Benjamin: And why when you pick up the TV magazine each week are there 9 inserts, for hearing aids – got one.  Special offer on sanitary towels – no use to me at the moment, Double glazing – got it.  Cheap[er Venetian blinds – wouldn’t have anything Venetian anyway.  All a lot of absolutely carp but if you question they will say that had to be designed, printed, distributed. The paper and the ink had to be purchased so in a quirky sort of way that created employment.  No leaflets, no printers, no designers.
Joseph: Yeah but a lot of it is instead of focussed advertising it’s just general.  Alright they make their money on the 1% that buy it.  But 99% of it gets binned.  So it’s not good use of resources.
Jenny: But the other thing is you were saying why all this packaging.  I’m sorry I can tell you.  If I am in a hurry and I’m rushing, to grab a packet of tomatoes is a lot quicker then sticking them in a bag.  If you are in a hurry, I’m sorry but the packets are quicker.
Ross: Yeah but why have a packet within a packet within a packet, within a box?
Jenny: Yeah alright.
All: Talking
Sophie: Yeah but they could just …..
Benjamin: I don’t know if anyone listens to Terry Wogan in the morning  Radio Two.  I would make him a saint tomorrow .  I worship at his feet.  Honey, the most natural thing in the world , produced by bees, used to embalm the Egyptians 3000 years ago.  Go in to Tesco – why’s it got a sell by date on it?
Timothy: Because they have to.  They’ve got to put sell by dates on everything.
Benjamin: Or best before.  If you can embalm a body for 3000 years…….
all: [talking]
Benjamin: No you’ve got to use it.  I don’t think so.
Gareth: Probably a European directive.
Rosemary: Yes it is.
Gareth : But it does lead to a lot of food being thrown away for no reason.  
Benjamin: Gordon was on about that yesterday wasn’t he?
Timothy: Yeah things like corned beef which will literally outlive all of us in a tine!  But it’s got a 5 year……
All: Talking
Moderator: Ok.  Thank you very much.