Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Hopefully this will work.  I had one meeting with both went off right in the middle of the meeting there was a little bit of a disaster but anyway we can work, so the first thing I want to ask you is for a short introduction round if you could say just your first name and anything else you want to tell the people, so if you want to tell them about what you are doing at the moment, something like that, just a brief round.    As I said I’m Moderator, researcher here at Exeter University and working on a travel behaviour project, focussing on daily travel and holiday travel, maybe to my left.
Matt: I’m Matt, I live in Exeter, I teach. I’m married with kids.
Becky: I’m Becky, I’m married with a baby and a second baby due. I’m still working at the moment as a scientist.
Tim: I’m Tim, I’ve just finished Uni here in Exeter and at the moment I’m living in Exeter looking for work.
Mary: I’m Mary and I’m a (0:01:23.9) and I’ve got two grown up children and a husband and live in G(0:01:31.9)
Colin: I’m Colin, live in Heavitree, I’m retired and married with two grown up sons.
Derek: I’m Derek, I live in Mount Pleasant, married with a daughter.
Moderator: Okay.  Thank you very much.  Our first issue on my list is focussing on travel measures in general.  Policy, planning measures, what you can think of and we are focussing on daily travel so how you travel for different purposes, for shopping, going to work and other things and also including holiday travel and the first question is a real general one, do you feel that we, in general need to change the way we travel?
Matt: For holiday?
Moderator: General, holiday, daily travel anything you can think of.
Matt: Too many cars on the road in Exeter.  That’s simple isn’t it.  Congestion in Exeter is pretty crazy at certain times of the day.
Derek: That’s putting mildly isn’t it.
Moderator: So you think that there is some need for changes?  
Matt: Yeah.
Derek: If you are talking about Exeter specifically, then there is a lot of changes that you can do, one of them would be to get rid of the Council because they are deliberately slowing the traffic down more and more and more by putting in lights where you don’t really need them.  In my business, I go out to a lot of businesses and I get a lot of information.  Okay, I don’t know how accurate it is, but if someone says to me “my friend who works in County Court says this…” then I 80% believe it and one of my favourite stories is ‘we have still got money in the kitty, I want you to spend the whole day to see where we can put more traffic lights.  So they came back and said well we could put them there and we could put them there.  Okay, well we’ll do that then.’  So they spent the money and put these traffic lights in, quite unnecessarily.  They could have used that money with I guess other pots of money in the same department and possibly do other things with the roads to make the traffic run smoother.  I also understand and I don’t know how true this is but I heard it four times, three times in a taxi when I was a taxi 3 years ago that the person in charge of the traffic overall at the County Council overall is fanatical about getting cars out of Exeter and he doesn’t drive.  And I feel you know a little bit, how can you be qualified to be in charge of roads if you can’t drive and as has been proved recently when they decided to come up by the prison, they thought that might be an idea, did you see that?  They thought they might close off New North Road and divert all the traffic around the prison.  Well due to their complete stupidity, they’ve changed the lights on the Duke of York/Civil Street cross roads in such a way it’s already delaying the traffic up and queuing the traffic up more and more, oh I could go on and on and on but I won’t I’ll let somebody else have a go.  
Moderator: Okay, thanks a lot.  Mary what do you think?
Mary: I’d like it to be a bit safer for the bicycles.  It’s really dangerous with the cars, it makes people not want to go out on bikes, I know lots of people say they just don’t want to cycle because it’s just too dangerous and Carrot Street, I don’t know what it is about Carrot Street, but they are try and kill you there, honestly they do.  It’s just so scary and the buses get so close do you find that?  You know they are within this much of you and it’s just makes me wobble with scaredom.  
Becky: Exeter is supposed to be a cycling demonstration town isn’t it and they’ve spent all that money on cycle routes for the schools, but not for commuters or general travel which is a shame.  It’s good to get to kids into cycling but if as soon as they leave school there is nowhere safe to go then they are not going to carry on.
Matt: I think the ones that are off road, the cycle paths that are off road, down by the quay and things are all really good, but on the road, sometimes you are cycling along and suddenly it just says end and the cycle path ends.
Mary: It’s so annoying
Matt: And then suddenly you are back into the traffic
Derek: Absolutely.
Colin: You are in the cycle lane and there is always somebody parked in it.
All: ‘agrees’
Derek: There’s a place down at Marsh Barton, the Matford side of Marsh Barton and it’s probably, I don’t know each side of the road the width of this table and a half a width again probably on each side of the road for the cyclists, which is fine to a point but a) nobody cycles down there but anyway and then you’ve got the road south where the cars are supposed to drive along and it’s just wide enough for a car and it’s a busy two way road.  There’s cars going up and down there every minute probably and I go down there every week and I think I’ve probably seen two cyclists in three, four years since it’s been like that.  But I also understand from the cyclists point of view that it is dangerous isn’t it when you are going along a road and the cars you know whatever, it’s a 50/50 sort of situation isn’t it, because I’ve tried to figure it out if you are a cyclist you should have a designated space I think, somehow it has to be divided from the road of the cars doesn’t it, whether it be a kerb that high or whatever I don’t know, but at the same time it doesn’t help when cyclists go through red lights and you miss them by that much, which has happened, they do down one way streets, which is illegal and so on and so on.  Education is perhaps required for cyclists, I don’t know.
Mary: It does annoy me, because we get a bad reputation and people think it’s dangerous because a lot of cyclists have accidents, but half of the time it is because cyclists are doing stupid things and not following the road rules.
Derek: It doesn’t help.
Tim: I do that to get away from the traffic, get on the pavement to get away from the traffic.
Derek: I was just going to say if I was a cyclist only I’m sure I would do cheating things as well, but at the same time going onto the pavement and bouncing along at 20 miles an hour with a lady with a pram.  It is a 50/50 situation there.
Mary: I think the other thing is nobody has mentioned buses and the cost of them, I mean buses in Exeter are ridiculous, to go from the High Street to Mount Pleasant costs me, I don’t know £1.30 or something and it’s like a 5 minute trip.
Moderator: That’s not really, you know
Mary: It doesn’t encourage people, especially if there’s more than a couple of you then you are going to go in town and pay parking fees.
Derek: I like it when you try and catch a bus by Costcutter at Mount Pleasant into town and 5 buses come by and not one of them are you allowed to catch at certain times of the day because they are coming from Cullompton, it’s park and ride, it’s another park and ride you know.  That’s so annoying.  That doesn’t help matters does it really.
Moderator: Okay, thanks a lot.  Right you already brought something up on my list.  I’ll just start again with a general question, what is your view of current transport policy.  You already gave us your view of this so maybe Colin you could tell us your thoughts.
Colin: I agree with what Rod said about traffic lights.  There seem to be put in where they are not needed.  Even when you’ve got side roads and you need to that (0:09:46.0) you can have a moan about the mini roundabout in some places, countless mini roundabouts are a prime example of where they can put and made things worse and it seems the council will never admit their mistake and go back to the previous situation.  The other thing is I’d like to see the High Street pedestrianised, that is no buses or maybe no .. as well, but no buses. 
Derek: Well a woman walked in front a bus not long ago, she thought it was all pedestrianised, not realising a bus could come up and down, she gets hit by the bus, falls on the floor of course and the bus driver goes “Huh, another one.” And drives on.  By then people were looking after her and she wasn’t hurt but that’s not the point, it’s obviously a regular occurrence which proves your point doesn’t it.
Moderator: Tim, maybe?
Tim: About Transport policy in Exeter?
Moderator: In General, yes if you want, first in Exeter but you can also think about general topics on a national scale.
Tim: I’ve got a slightly different view on it because I walk mostly in Exeter, and I think Exeter generally is very friendly for walking because it’s quite a small town and you’ve got access to a lot of things in a smaller area but I agree with the comments about buses and bicycles, bicycles being feeling dangerous to cycle on the roads and buses being too expensive and I think it kind of reflects a general issue with transport that we are being told to use public transport more or to use greener methods of transport say such as cycling, where actually it’s not made that easy to do those things I don’t think.  I especially think buses but more than buses trains are ridiculously expensive and I am tempted to say I think trains should be nationalised again, which is not a very popular point of view at the moment, but if there is no effective competition to drive prices down because you’ve only got on operator running on one bit of track so you don’t have choice to use a different train company and prices as a result are ridiculously high I think.  
Colin: You also need to know where you are going in three weeks time to get a cheaper ticket.  
Tim: You can get some really good deals if you are three or more weeks.
Becky: It is better now that they have made it advanced off peak, it’s going to get a lot simpler, but it is so silly that you can pay four times the amount for the same journey.  
Moderator: Thank you.  I have to mention one quite, it’s quite related to some things you’ve already said, you mentioned Rod you mentioned you had problems with congestion and you’ve said the Government wants people to travel differently and (0:13:19.5) committed to an 80% reduction in carbon emissions and in view of that what do you think about the transport policy in general.  Do you have any ideas about that, maybe Mary?
Mary: Well it’s a great idea not to use cars and everything, but they are terribly convenient to get from A to B, it’s sad really but I can’t cycle miles and miles and miles.  I like to think I can, but I can’t.  I can cycle to (0:13:55.4) and back, but that’ s about my limit really.  But you need a car and to get to very inaccessible places, you just need a car to get there.  
Matt: I think we have developed to a point where we’re very dependent on cars, the way people work, the way people travel, that to simply try and get people out of their cars is not going to be that effective and it seems that a lot of their approach in that involves increasing taxes which, I don’t think really has that effect because people do need their cars so they are prepared to pay a bit extra and I guess I would have thought it made more sense to focus more on trying to make cars ‘quote greener’ than to be trying to sort of force people out of them.
Mary: And also, at the hospital they use the car share scheme a lot, and that’s working really well actually.  A friend of mine uses that a lot and that really helps a lot in cutting down.
Becky: I think that there are a lot of journeys, I agree that there are times when you do need a car but there are also a lot of journeys that people use their cars for but if the alternatives were better then they would…
Matt: Cheaper and easier to use. I walk to work in the morning going against the traffic coming into Exeter and the vast majority of cars that are going into the City Centre there is one person in that car and presumably they are probably all, a lot of them, parking very near to each other in a small space.
Derek: It would be interesting to take a survey wouldn’t it?  If you can while they are stuck in traffic, while you’ve got two minutes could you just say where do you live where have you come from?  Okay thanks.  And it would be interesting to see where all these people are coming from and see how many of them come from an area of Exeter where it would work out to car share.  I would imagine that a lot of people you know they do come in especially the Heavitree side they are all spread out from Exmouth to Sidmouth to wherever, so whether it would work I don’t know, I don’t know.
Becky: I think that is what Park and Ride’s are supposed to be doing aren’t they though, so they should park on the outskirts and hop on the bus, but I don’t know how expensive that is really. 
Derek: I’m not sure how much that is.
Mary: It’s not so much the expense it’s the inconvenience of having to get to the park and ride so very early in the morning and then get on the bus and you arrive sort of half and hour before work.  
Matt: Selling the idea of stop here and get on the bus when you can just continue your journey in the car.  The only way you are going to do that is to provide an incentive to do it or ban someone from doing that.  You know you can’t go into the City Centre and that might stop it.
Derek: The only incentive is free isn’t it really.  Park free and get a free ride into town, between the certain hours of whatever and whatever, you know after that you pay.
Matt: Then you save on your car parking 
Derek: That’s right.
Colin: You can only go to work if you catch the park and ride, your office block might be a mile away from that.
Matt: But then our towns, they are planned aren’t they around, we are still planning and building our town of Exeter around the car we haven’t stopped that.  You know Toys R Us has just opened on S(0:17:26.7) which is clearly built for the car isn’t it, you know you can’t walk there or cycle there and the family it’s built, a big car park, you are going to drive there, park up.
Derek: That sort of contradicts it all doesn’t it.  You know they are trying to make it greener in Exeter and they put the Toys R Us there, which is fine as such but when it gets busy which it will do in December in particular, the traffic is going to be queuing up to Middlemoor, it does anyway in the summer and busy times.
Matt: But it got it’s own lane built, it’s own drive in car lane to get to it, they held up the traffic there for months while the road works were being done.  You know it must be worthwhile for someone to have that Toys R Us built there, you know, regardless of the, you know.
Derek: Well somebody somewhere yeah, I mean they had to put in special traffic lights and everything didn’t they.  But I can imagine its going to cause horrendous problems at busy times, even more so than it does already.
Matt: But they probably claim that there is some kind of environmental study been done into that putting it there, but.
Colin: There is also sorts of traffic coming off the M5 into Taunton and coming into the City Centre.
Matt: Sure I mean in some ways it makes sense because the traffic doesn’t all have to come into the Town, but that building it built for the car, it’s not built for any other mode of transport.
Tim: I think one of the other things is peoples attitude to cars and public transport needs to change, which I think it’s starting to do as people are more aware of environmental issues, but a lot of people still very much have the attitude that the car is somehow, I don’t know a mark of various things like independence, money, you know all that sort of thing and they wouldn’t want to get on the bus with everyone else they want to sit in their little air conditioned box and drive to work or into town or whatever, but I’m not sure exactly how you go about changing that.
Moderator: Thanks a lot, we will come back to that in the second bit because I’ll show you some maybe possible measures, I will ask you for your opinion about that.  At the moment I want to ask you, you can try to imagine an ideal world we are living in an ideal world now and if you wanted to change your own travel behaviour, the first thing is do you want to change it, do you think it could be good to change it and if you want to change your travel behaviour how would you like to travel in an ideal world.  It could be the same as you are travelling right now, by car or walking or if you can think of different things then just let me know.  Anybody, so for instance we mentioned that buses could be cheaper or cars could be greener or all these things together, just imagine it would be an ideal world travel wise and how would you like to travel and yeah, let us know.
Tim: I love walking everywhere, I actually really like that.  At the moment it is convenient for me I know it depends where you work. I am looking for work at the moment within central Exeter and I know that some people need cars to get to work and so on, but I really like being able to walk to everything that I use like the leisure activities that I do I tend to walk to, if I go out I walk into town etc, etc.  I really like that for one thing I’d want in a sort of ideal world would be to be able to get trains so, I really like getting trains and I’d like to be able to travel further for less money as it were.  My family lives up in Essex which is quite a long way and then we are looking at something like £50 - £70 return if I want to go up and visit my family, which is a lot of money.
Mary: I think for things to join up more so that I can get the train a lot, but it would be nice if you could get the train to wherever and then you could get straight on a bus that is taking you closer, you’ve got your train and then you end up getting a taxi or something, because there is no other way of getting to the end of the journey
Moderator: Integrated
Mary: Yeah.
Tim: That’s the good thing about walking it’s integrated with everything.
Moderator: Depending on the distance though.
Derek: We used to say in the old days that taxis is probably one of the cheapest forms of transport if there is four of you, because it would pick you up from your house and take you exactly to where you used to go but this was often proved by students because what they used to do if they went to the bus stop in the rain or whatever and waited 10, 20 sometime more because the bus didn’t turn up, it only takes them to the bus station or High Street at Beth and they want to go to the Quayside so it’s another bus or a long walk and that all costs them, I don’t know what the student rates are but lets say a quid each, so that’s four quid, whereas for four quid it would take you from their house straight down to the Quay in 5 minutes, or something like that.  So unless you have got traffic jams a taxi is even cheaper than a bus if there is four of you.  But if there is traffic jams then obviously it isn’t cheaper because obviously the meter still runs when you are stuck in traffic jams, so perhaps we get rid of the buses and everybody takes taxis.
Moderator: Okay, thank you and that is some kind of car sharing I guess.  If you need four people.  Thanks a lot.  Anybody else at this stage?
Matt: I’d like to cycle more, I’d like to feel that it was an option to cycle more.
Moderator: Why?
Matt: If it was safer and there was better cycle lanes then I would do that.  At the moment if I’m not taking the car then I’ll walk rather than cycle.
Mary: Yes and if you have one of those sticky out things that is called a target for the car, the cars go for that.  
Moderator: Thanks a lot.
Derek: It would be nice though if it was possible to cycle or walk but, from that point of view it’s quite a large city, in my particular job on a Wednesday I do the town centre and therefore I do walk then from Mount Pleasant more often than not other times to do my job if I did any other form of transport apart from my car it would take me twice as long to do, so therefore that isn’t convenient from your general going from home to work situation yes it would be nice to be able to walk, catch a bus without having to wait 20 minutes, quarter of an hour, whatever and take you almost to the spot and so forth so perhaps it is the answer, more buses, regular so they are every 10 minutes, or every 5 minutes or something at peak times or something.  I don’t know.
Tim: Still half the problem is getting to places that are off the route, so
Derek: Well that’s true.
Tim: That’s why I say I think we’ve kind of structured everything around cars, it’s kind of an assumption that people have access to cars.
Mary: Yes, it would cut down a lot of village buses haven’t they.
Tim: Yes, so it is hard to see how we could radically reduce the number of cars without restructuring the way everyone works, lives, moves around you know.
Matt: It has to be a lifestyle choice doesn’t it for individuals, I used to commute an hour to work in one direction and an hour back.  I did that everyday for 6 years and it’s too much and then it wasn’t a consideration about the money or the environment that was a consideration about needing a job you know, I’ve got a car an hour is achievable, but when I changed jobs one of my thoughts was I want to be nearer to home, so I can get more time at home and I’m not spending so much time driving and in cars, but that’s difficult for everyone to do isn’t it.
Becky: Are your children school age?
Matt: Yeah.
Becky: Do they get much, you know I’m just wondering whether the next generation coming through are more environmentally aware kids now, you know it’s too late for us or people who were before us but maybe when these kids grown up they will be more used to.
Matt: I think for a school leaver now they’ve got more important things to think about, they just need a job don’t they.  An hour to work if you need a job badly 
Becky: I imagine 17 years olds still want to have a car and be able to drive don’t’ they.
Matt: It’s quite achievable to drive an hour to work if you’ve got a car and you are that in need to work.
Derek: I wonder if there is a danger that the children are driven everywhere then the children do less exercise because the schools don’t seem to encourage it as much as they used to a long time ago and I’m sure a lot of people do take their children to school by car, you know you live around the corner that is exaggerated possibly but you know what I mean short distances and things but then she may say well I’ll drop you off at school and then I’ll go and do the shopping you know, Tesco’s.
Matt: We’ve done some work on this at school with the kids about who drives to school and a lot of them are being driven on their way to drop another sibling at another school or on the way to work or you know to, yeah. I’m trying to think about how you get away from that because.
Moderator: Okay, thank you very much.
Tim: Basically I’ve got an ideal world suggestion, I think people should pick up hitch hikers more, seriously I know people are a bit don’t like to do it, but I think it’s a great idea, I think it’s got positive benefits for the people driving as well as for the hitch hikers, you meet interesting people you know
Mary: My daughter hitchhiked in Iceland with her boyfriend, they had a whale of a time because they went to all of these different places and people told them about all of these really interesting places and nobody else sort of knew about really and they had a fantastic time, it was a bit of a shock to us but you know…
Tim: I went into town on Sunday night and I live down Heavitree and I was thinking I could start off walking and if a bus goes past and I’m near a bus stop I’ll get on a bus as I set off walking I thought I bet every car on a Sunday night that is going past me into town is probably just going into town I could easily just go could I have a lift, but people wouldn’t stop these days because they think there is a young man walking along in the dark at night, well I’m not picking him up, but.
Colin: Probably a murderer
Tim: Yeah, but everyone was going that way and I’m sure as you say.
Matt: Most people would actually be happy to give someone a lift I would have thought because it just doesn’t occur to people.
Colin: It used to be quite commonplace
Mary: Yes
Colin: It’s just suddenly stopped as if strangers were all dangerous.
Tim: The only people you ever see hitchhiking now are stood over at Sandygate and they do look weird and they hang up a little bit of paper and you think actually I’m not stopping for him.
Derek: You don’t see that many hitchhikers as such but I’m sure you are right there is a lot of people walking along that if they knew that somebody would stop such as going to work or whatever, but they probably would stop, somebody would stop sooner or later.
Becky: I tried to hitch back from the Devon County Show once and it was crazy nobody stopped and I was getting crosser and crosser you know these cars were whizzing past me with one person in and I eventually caught the bus.
Moderator: Maybe you should introduce some hitchhiking schemes or something like that to make it safer and more reliable for people.  Thanks a lot.    Now I want you to focus on possible changes in daily travel behaviour and we already mentioned some reasons for necessary changes in daily travel, for example to reduce congestion or maybe environmental reasons, for these carbon reductions or whatever and we developed three scenarios and I want you to take a look at them.  Don’t be scared, there is no way they will be introduced in Exeter, so feel free to look at these things, some more radical, some just additional taxes what has been discussed recently and we would encourage you to think of how different measures could be combined from each scenario or what do you think about the specific scenario so you could pick out some single measures and combine them if they would work for you feel free to make note if you want.  I just want to read it would once and then tell me what you think of it.    Some things have already been mentioned so scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport punctuality and reliability, if that’s possible, just imagine everything is possible here.  New smart car ticketing, simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements, increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures.  So these are some ideas how we could encourage people to change travel behaviour.  Scenario two includes mainly some constraints like increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars emitting more pollutants, congestion charges in most towns and cities, more toll roads, paying to drive, where you pay more to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas, major improvements in public transport from these tax revenues resulting in major improvements in public transport services significant reduction in congestion to major roads and significant reduction in carbon emissions would be the results of that.    As I said don’t be scared or afraid that somebody wants to introduce these things in Exeter, so just reflect on it from your personal point of view.  Scenario three includes banning vehicles with highly polluting engines, having a car free day one day a week, full or part pedestreanisation of urban centres, that was already mentioned in this discussion.  Restrictions on the number of cars each household could own, major and sustained decreases in traffic levels resulting from the switch over to public transport for this infrastructure or major reductions in carbon emissions and yes as I said don’t see these scenarios as set in stone, or written in stone, you can pick single things and tell us if you think that would work for you, if it could be a good idea or if it would never work so we are just open the discussion. 
Mary: I don’t think no car day is going to work because there is so many people who are totally reliant on their cars, especially who are coming in from the country.  My friend moved out from Exeter to Heel and she is totally reliant on her car now, which is sad isn’t it.
Matt: You’ve got to provide a convenient cheap alternative if you are going to say no cars. Any of these things that say ban this don’t do that there has got to be something that’s you know an incentive to people to change and to do that.
Colin: Someone is going to have an emergency on the no car day and they need to get somewhere.
Moderator: So what do you think could work for these people?  Something from the list, something different, or what would work for you?
Mary: Well I don’t have too much of a problem, because of my bike, so I could get to places, so I don’t think, thinking about the city area and the villages it’s getting further out.
Moderator: Okay, Becky?
Becky: I think the smart car ticketing, or simpler and reduced fares for buses would be good, I mean  for a while they had a £1 any journey in the city zone but they only did it for a short while.  We were in Edinburgh recently and there it is £1.20 per journey and there is so many people you just get on and put your money in the box and 10 people get on in 30 seconds and you are off again and it is a lot simpler and easier and people seem to use it more.  
Derek: I am surprised that they don’t have that deal in Exeter they should have one price, be it a pound or whatever distance.
Mary: So do you have a card then and put it in the slot
Becky: You can have a card or just
Derek: Put the money in.  Isn’t it £1.20 or £2.20 return or something.  
Becky: It’s £1.20 for any single journey or £3 for a day
Derek: Oh is that what it was is it, because I know when we went up there recently we thought blimey this is cheap we can go wow
Becky: Yes you can go anywhere for £1.20
Derek: That was our reaction I would imagine most people’s reaction would be similar, wow is that all it is, I can go on the bus all day and have fun.  Which would encourage people I would have thought especially if they were 
Tim: Those kind of tickets where you can get one ticket and then travel, make a number of journeys on it are very good, and they can work out very good value but, for example, I’m not sure how it works in Exeter but back in Essex where my family lives you can get a sort of day ticket for 2, say 3 quid that you can make as many journeys as you like on within a certain area and that is a really good value ticket, but then from where I get the bus the single price into town is almost the same price as that day ticket, so in a way I’d rather there was the option for a much cheaper single ticket as well, it’s good to have simpler fares, but it’s also good to have different options for the specific kind of journeys you are making.  
Moderator: Thanks.  Colin any ideas?
Colin: Well my bus travel is free because I’m over 60. I hardly ever use a bus because I don’t see the point of having a bus like in Exeter if (0:37:34.6) so I tend to cycle or walk in the city and if I’m going farther a field it depends where I’m going could be in the car or the train, so for me it hasn’t encouraged me to use public transport at all.
Moderator: Interesting, thanks.
Matt: You could certainly do some work with the types of journeys that people take, like the one about working in the centre of town I think it quite an obvious one, you know on any given day there is probably 7 or 8 different routes into the city where people are going straight to the city centre to work and if you go, I used to drive the Crediton road and that road from Crediton to Exeter is just full of cars that appear to be going in one direction to one place and I think there is a whole number of things you could do with that to encourage people, what we said about the free park and ride where you park up, or could have things like, they do that thing in Los Angeles don’t they were if you have got more than two people in your car you can use the outside lane, you could have cars of three or more people travelling into Exeter can use the bus lane or something like that.  I think any kind of incentive like that if you bring in four, four people come in your car you don’t have to pay to park in the city centre.
Moderator: Okay, thank you.
Becky: Buses always seem to have, you know they are either full or you’re the only person on it.
Derek: It does seem that way doesn’t it.
Becky: Sort of want more, you know it’s probably impossible for them to do but double deckers at peak times so that it’s not so crowded.
Mary: What you do is work on the green buses, I’ve been on quite a few green buses that have broken down.  You know one broke down on the way to Silverton and the chaps Polish and he didn’t know what he was at with the bus it was a total miracle that it actually started again, it was just really awful.
Moderator: Rod, what do you think, anything that would work for you or you can always pick out single things or combine things if you want.
Derek: Well, I don’t think the increased parking charges is going to help or increased fuel taxes, I think probably greener cars would help if there was an incentive to change to a greener car.  Congestion charges, in my opinion is just purely a tax and a complete waste of time and the real money is never used for what it is supposed to be used for.  Likewise with toll roads I suppose.
Becky: They’ve got congestion charges in London haven’t they, has that actually reduced the congestion at all.
Derek: I don’t’ know I think it might have done originally but I don’t think it’s continued that way, I’m not sure.  I guess it’s very difficult to do an opinion, to accurate for a general situation, I can only talk about my living in Exeter really, as a consequence because of what Exeter is like influences your decision on these answers.  You know, yes of course we could do with major improvements on the public transport services as we have already mentioned, more regular buses, cheaper prices, fixed prices system or whatever.  No cars once a week I think is a complete waste of time, no drive zones, we’ve got that already, restrictions for the cars, but you can’t have a reduction in the number of cars per household can you, I mean human rights and all of that would come into that wouldn’t it.  But it is interesting how society has changed.  When I was growing up my mum had a car and my dad had a company car, when I was old enough to drive I used my mothers, whereas now it’s mother and father, son and daughter you have four cars in that one drive.  Well everybody has a car these days you know it’s well you know what I mean.
Moderator: Okay, just before we switch to a different thing, car sharing has already been mentioned or do you know lets say car clubs, where you don’t have to own a car but you can use a car, is there anybody who says it would work, Becky maybe?
Becky: Yeah, I think it would be a really good idea, we were going to join it but then my sister in law, they have two cars in their family and they live just around the corner so they offered to, what they’ve done is put my husband on their insurance so we can borrow theirs, so it is the same principal I suppose, otherwise we were going to join the Exeter car club, yeah I think they are a really good idea.  If you do tend to use public transport or walk or something but there are times when you need a car, which is what we were finding especially with a little one so we probably only borrow that car once in a couple of months, but it gives us that option.  
Derek: What do you think stops people car sharing?  Because it seems to me that they keep on about it and on about it, I don’t know too much about it because obviously I’m not really affected but you were saying you see all these one people in cars as they are queuing to come into work and I just wondered if there was something that puts people off from car sharing, is it because they might be scared of picking up loonies or 
Mary: Just convenience you know if you are dependent upon someone else picking you up and you’ve got to go at the same time and come home at the some time, you know, 
Derek: Is that what it is.
Mary: I suppose with flexible working, so many work, people don’t just work 9 – 5 they do slightly different things.
Matt: I’ve got to say you network with people as well, you know the people in your area if they work near you, and we are not as friendly as we once were with the people who live nearer to and next to you so you wouldn’t know unless you happen to bump into somebody that works and lives in that place.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  Another set of scenarios, sorry about that, but they are now shifting towards holiday travel, we haven’t been talking much about holiday travel so far.  But obviously holiday travel abroad is something that all of us are affected by things like carbon reduction schemes and commitments and again if you could just go through these three scenarios and tell me what you think of it and if there is something that would work for you.  I’ll just again read it out for you.    Scenario one includes encouraging carbon offsetting schemes, if you don’t know what something means just ask me if you think you need some explanation.  Incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket cost, provide employee based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave for travelling on slower modes, or incentivise UK holidays perhaps through tax breaks on not paying VAT for UK holidays.  That is scenario one and again just tell me what you think what could work for you and you can also pick out single points.  Scenario two includes increased air passenger tax due to anti aviation fuel tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane and invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK.  Scenario three relatively brief, provide citizens with carbon vouchers restricting the amount of carbon incentive activities.  A comprehensive scheme including flying, for instance daily travel and energy use at home so people are having a certain budget for their carbon emissions and they can decide how they use it but it’s a limited budget.  Yeah, so what do you think regarding holiday travel.
Becky: A variation on the third one I think restricting it might be a bit much but if you had some incentive like getting it below a certain level your council tax is reduced or something.  Something to aim for.
Matt: The only issue with that is how you would sort of administer it, it’s going to involve monitoring effectively and
Tim: But these days you are needing your home buyers survey, they’ve got to have, each homes got to have a grade A you know those things you see on your fridge.  Your home is rated for A, B, you know whatever, then when you do your insurance and your MOT and stuff you have to provide your mileage for each year don’t you.  It wouldn’t be that hard to be big brother definitely would it.  It wouldn’t be hard to know what kind of house you lived in, how many miles you drove and if you say if it was an incentive if you kept your carbon units below this number you get £100 off your council tax, it’s quite extreme but its very good isn’t it.
Matt: It is very big brother.
Becky: But if you chose not to do it then you are not going to get the benefit but you could just chose not to be on the scheme if it was a voluntary thing.
Tim: But all that information that’s because we know its happening then.  It’s all happening already isn’t it.  That data about your mileage, what your house is like it’s all held there by someone already.
Matt: It’s not very good reversing that trend. 
Tim: It’s all there the energy companies have it, your MOT, your insurance company has that information doesn’t it.
Colin: Scenario two or three seem a big negative really they are punitive.  Scenario one is a bit more encouraging.  Distance rail travel by reduced ticket cost is one that stands out because (0:48:44.0) why would you go any other way? 
Moderator: Anything else.  Derek?
Derek: No, I don’t think so.
Tim: I think this whole issue though does tie in a lot with the Toys R Us scenario doesn’t it.  At one point we are saying we need to stop people travelling further and their impact on the environment but at the same time we are building a new runway at Heathrow, we want actually we want the Government wants people to be travelling more to get the tax and the income, the revenue from that so you know to then start taxing people more because they chose to fly almost being encouraged to do that and to.
Derek: Don’t you think though that the Government is really opposites about how green you should be its just a mask isn’t it really.  It’s purely tax raising purposes.
Matt: There is one thing I haven’t seen mentioned here because I guess it’s not really within the scope of this scenarios but rather than just looking at tax incentives I would have thought education is a big part of it and making people more aware of a) the sort of environmental issues and that sort of thing and then b) the options that are available to people in terms of travel I mean we are talking about car shares and also to change attitudes to again while we are talking about cars people have got certain attitudes that they have got to have their own car and that is their independence their status symbol, they need whatever it is and that is something that you are not going to change through tax incentives necessarily.
Derek: I think the trouble is again talking to the people I talk to, which is all sorts of people, I am getting the distinct impression that people are now not believing that we have got a problem not in our granddaughter’s life time maybe in their daughters but they can’t see, they have been told so much stuff and because you don’t actually physically see the difference themselves in Exeter I think a lot of people will begin to think oh for god’s sake who cares less, you know it’s that sort of attitude and until that has changed you are not going to see anything change in terms of transport from your personal point of view are you.
Matt: Also, I think in terms of the education I think it is totally the way we should be going with it.  I don’t think kids are stupid either and they see that we say one thing about the environment and all that we need to do and need to change our habits and then we see the evidence of that not being the case.  You know this is what we are telling you we should change and how you should think, but actually this town that you live in and you are part of is still planned around the car.  I think if they saw that suddenly we said everything from now on is going to be planned around bikes and walking and public transport and the car is going to be you know left in the dark ages you suddenly would you’d have a really good case to educate them and help them and I think they’d really buy into it but I’m not sure you can pull the wool that easily.
Derek:  It’s difficult isn’t it really.  
Moderator: I’ve already raised our last point, we are nearly approaching the 60 minutes and again one thing I asked you to think about to get you to change your behaviour what are the key messages you need to hear, we already heard something from you Matt and from whom you want to hear and what policies need to change and again for you to think of any ideas no matter how implausible they may seem at the moment, so you can introduce something you want to or just give your general feedback on what you think would be necessary for you to hear or who should say it or just as a round up for the whole discussion here.
Derek: Well I guess if you want the masses to change their attitude towards something you’ve got to be influential through the media and in particular television and you’ve got to have people who are really, Terry Wogan from the top of my head for an example, he would have a big influence on a lot of people of a certain age group and he could do a commercial, do a programme whatever, whatever and that as I see it is probably the only real effect you would have, because it doesn’t matter how much you would put in print in the newspaper because well yeah, yeah sure, you know I don’t know I can’t think of any other way to do it really.  If the Government really wanted you to stop using the car they would have done it ages ago because they are the law they say this is what is going to be happening, they say this is a pink piece of paper, it’s a pink piece of paper and you can’t argue with it.  So therefore it proves my point they are not fussed about it they are just making it look good.  So if you really want people to change their attitude towards the environment you’ve got to go through the media and in particular television.
Matt: But that’s got to be backed up hasn’t it again, Terry Wogan does a commercial and people need to hear that and see that on the ground oh yeah that policy has changed it’s supported by this person it’s on the telly oh yeah I can see that I can see the difference that point makes.  Rather than just words that oh they’ve just roped in some celebrity to do a campaign.
Derek: Sure, that’s right or even a programme seeing it from a different angle, I don’t know a life story of a child born today as an example and you know in 10 years time leaves aren’t falling off the trees and isn’t it a shame because when we were young we used to have great fun watching the leaves fall down, you know that sort of thing, I don’t know as oppose to oh the ice is melting, yeah so what who cares, ice is forming over there, it doesn’t really have any, if things are going to change because of the environment changing people have to understand how it is going to change their lives on a personal level I may not be able to go to the pub anymore, you know that sort of level is the only way they are going to influence them.
Matt: You’ve got to scare people.
Moderator: Colin?
Colin: I think the way that travel forms is portrayed in fiction on television dissuades people from switching from cars sort of the driver of the BMW is successful and he’s riding a bike and he’s some sort of loser.  A nobody walks unless they are going upstairs.
Becky: What a jerry/nazi thing.
Colin: Yeah.
Tim: Well cars and motorbikes have both got an almost sort of mythic status haven’t they in pop culture you think of all those sort of American road movies and all that kind of thing and then car chases in action films and all that sort of thing the car is like this mythic symbol of something.  But I think in general people in this country have a pretty healthy cynicism about anything that the government is trying to tell them which is good in a lot of ways but can make it hard to get messages across but I think if you some times if something is talked about for long enough and in enough places people just kind of absorb the ideas involved like with climate issues people have almost picked them up by osmosis because they see it talked about everywhere they pick up the kind of buzz words rather than them just being told straight away by the government this is what we are doing this is the message that is going to sort of say what and get on with their lives so I think like you’ve said portraying it in different media and having the message come from different angles, different people.
Moderator: Thanks
Derek: You know give you an example, my daughter goes to school everyday, obviously, she is that age, and she has this horrible habit of leaving the light on in her bedroom and you’ve told her and you’ve told her and you’ve told her if you have somebody like JayZee, the rap star saying “hey Jessica you girl, switch the light off because if you don’t this da da.”  She’s probably go ‘Argh’ and switch the light off.  It’s that sort of thing isn’t it, it’s reaching the level.
Becky: I would just take the light bulb out.
Derek: There is that of course.  The usual one is …
Tim: But it might have to be drastic action though mightn’t it because there is a big argument that all this talk about saving the environment is we are actually about 30 yeas too late anyway, we should have done something 30 years ago and we are now actually just sort of reacting and running around maybe it does need some drastic measures.
Colin: That’s its changes as well.  Car use 30 years ago, there was an energy crisis we are all going to run out of oil so don’t use your cars so much, the only trouble is leaded petrol poisoned everyone so they had to limit their travel.  Lead has become carbon dioxide.  You could understand someone being cynical about the messages that are coming through it’s as if they just want to tell you don’t use your car.
Tim: These figures this week published on carbon emissions which are still rocketing up in this country they are just rocketing up at a slightly slower rate than they ever where before.  You just think well all this stuff you kind of think well actually maybe some of these drastic scenarios are what we actually have to do to change.
Mary: Well the transport is only one small part of the carbon industry, it’s probably the biggest
Tim: They’ve added a runway at Heathrow
Mary: Yes, you know there are other areas that the Government should be doing the drastic cuts on you are never going to get people out of their cars completely they could make some other bigger impact by doing something like I don’t know building the Severn Barrage or something.
Becky: They could have a blitz on hitching though couldn’t they.  They could say if it’s only you pick up a hitchhiker, you know some really catchy phrase, do you know what I mean, it’d be good wouldn’t it.
Colin: Interesting yeah.
Derek, : Why don’t they have people stops as opposed to bus stops, that would be even better, you are driving along and oh there’s three people there you pull in and I’m going into the centre of town do you want a lift, yes, no off we go.  It’s a simple as that.  You can’t do that at a bus stop because it’s illegal you see so you have to have another bus stop.
Tim: You could have some kind of scheme whereby, I don’t know people have hitch hiking cards or something and there is some way that if you pick up a hitch hiker you get a break on your road tax or whatever it is.  That might be a bit far fetched at the moment.
Mary: Well you’d have to pick up a certain amount to get a percentage off your car tax.
Colin: If it was official policy though the first instance of car jacking or anything people would say you’ve got to stop all this.
Matt: Maybe we could just start something now, let’s agree that every time we see someone when we drive into town we try and pick someone up.
Tim: The revolution starts in this room.
Tim: People keep stopping and offering me lifts.
Mary: You’d be saying to people just get in the car, you may not want to.
Derek: But I only live next door.
Mary: Doesn’t matter
Becky: I’ve always wondered about making the cycling proficiency part of the driving test so that people have to spend some time on a bike and so a) when they are then driving they have got the awareness of people on a bike and b) the fact that they could actually ride it means that they might be encouraged to do it.
Derek: It’s certainly education isn’t it on both sides of the fence at that cycling and motorists and things because the motorist doesn’t realise that he is so scared of hitting the car coming towards him because the roads are so narrow in some places but he is trying also to miss the bicyclist and it’s you know.
Becky: It’s also things like at roundabouts when you are on your bike you might stay to the left when you are going off at the second exit and the cars going around assume you are going around, you know there is things like that there is the awareness.
Moderator: Thanks.  Okay, so we have reached across the 60 minute border so I want to thank you all for participating today.  For me it was and interesting hour.