Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Again, you’re all welcome, thank you very much for being here today. As you’ve seen on the short question I gave to you and you know from the invitation we’re in the middle of a project trying to explain travel behaviour and people’s views and thoughts about certain about travel behaviour, policy and planning measures and that’s the main topic of this meeting today. My name is Moderator, I am a researcher here at Exeter University in the department of Geography and the first thing I want you to do is maybe a short introduction, if you could say your first name and if you want, what you’re doing at the moment and if not just pass on to the next person, starting to my left.
Guy: Well my name’s Guy and I’m retired, but I live in Exeter. I use a blue badge as I’m a fairly extensive car user.
Sharon: My name is Sharon, I live and work in Exeter, I use a car all the time, because it’s more convenient.
Lukas: My name’s Lukas, I’m retired also. I use a car extensively although I do walk a fair bit because I’ve got a dog.
Mark: I’m Mark, I work as an Agricultural Surveyor, travelling around the West Country, mainly visiting farmers, so a car’s fairly essential for me.
Stacey: I’m Stacey, I work part time, so I use just about every mode of transport I can get. But we live right at the edge of Exeter, so getting in and out of town’s a problem.
Stuart: I’m Stuart, I’ve just finished studying and I use buses because I can’t afford a car.
Moderator: OK, thank you very much. Probably I will try to stick to the schedule so that it will be sixty minutes and not longer and you will receive your money, the expenses at the end of the session, no problem with that I hope. So the first question is focussing on travel measures in general, policy planning measures, also including holidays, so not only daily travel there will be some questions regarding holiday travel. A very, very open, very general question, do you feel that we need to change the way we travel in general? Who wants to start.
Sharon: I think the only way that things will change is if the powers that be say there is no more petrol. I think that as long as there’s petrol, those that have access to cars will continue to use them and it’s quite simplistic to think that you can change the way people will behave.
Mark: I feel that my work and travel habits have grown up around the use of a car and it would be very difficult to carry on working the way I do, relying on any other form of public transport because there is no alternative.
Mike: I find the thing that puts me off public transport is its infrequency and also it’s cost. I mean it’s just a ridiculous cost. I mean for me it’s not so bad, because I can, although I haven’t bothered can get free transport, but my family who live very close, to take the children down the town it costs an absolute fortune. It’s just ridiculous and I think until there’s some real thought given to subsidise public transport and not just for older people but for families as well, I think people will simply stay in their car.
Stacey: I certainly feel there’s no choice really at the moment. I’ve just changed my motor from a car to a scooter which gets me through all the traffic jams, I can certainly notice.
Guy: As I said I’ve got the blue badge, because I’m slightly disabled I do tend to rely on the car more than most perhaps. But I think more people would use public transport a) if the fares were more reasonable and b) if they were more reliable and frequent. If you haven’t got a reliable public transport service people aren’t going to use it. Why should they stand in the cold and the wet waiting for a bus that never turns up.
Sharon: I don’t think that it needs to be frequent, would you agree that it would probably need to be reliable number one, frequency is irrelevant. If you know you’ve only got two buses in the hour then you’d time your day for that. They could improve it.
Guy: Yes. There are times that you see three or four buses all going the same way, all behind each other and you’ve missed them and then you wait there for forty five minutes. Many years ago I used to work in London and you often used to see four or five buses all behind each other, one was full up the others were empty or had one or two on them. So it needs traffic management I suppose with the buses.
Sharon: The technology must be there.
Guy: I would have thought so.
Sharon: If they can flash up a bus will be along in four minutes I’m sure they can say I’ll swap this bus to another route or something.
Mike: That’s how they do it on the underground in London, you can see exactly how long before a train.
Stuart: And it’s never very long is it. It’s always under five minutes. Well I don’t know, I’m a frequent bus user and I can get a weekly bus pass in Exeter for £12 and I never need to worry about transport at all, because I’m always fifteen minutes away from a bus stop and as long as I know what time the bus is there, then I’m ok. So I don’t generally have a problem with the bus system in Exeter. Back to the question I do think we do need to change the way we use transport, like especially basically stop using cars. But I completely agree with your point Sharon, there’s no way, if there’s petrol there we’re going to use it. Because being in your own air conditioned car in traffic is going to be far better then being in a bus. So I agree that we need to change it but there’s going to be a huge moral change in people to have to swap from using their cars to using public transport, cycling or walking.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. Very interesting, we’ll come back to the measures a little bit later, but we have some scenarios I can give out to you. But the next point and so far I might ask you what is your general view on the transport policy at the moment, what do you think about that? Maybe on a local level, but also think about the national level?
Sharon: I wasn’t aware there was a policy. I thought it was just make things as difficult as possible for everybody in the hope that either they wont use their cars or alternatively that they do use their cars because it’s so expensive to use public transport.
Mark: I come across the national planning policy a lot in the work I do, where I try and help the farmers diversify or try and develop some alternative enterprises. Very often that needs planning permission and whether or not you get planning permission depends on whether there’s a sustainable means of travel there. And planners interpret that as being any means other than by car. Obviously not many farms are on bus routes so it’s a major stumbling block for something which the government are supposedly encouraging. So there’s a real mish-mash of what are they trying to do and are they actually helping you or hindering you.
Sharon: I’d like to actually perhaps, if I had the patience, try and take the family for a day at the seaside, with all the paraphernalia that you like that you to take, your picnic box and everything, on public transport and just see who’s killed who first by the end of the day.
Stacey: The trains are very good. I think here in the south west, not far from the beach and I have used trains in the past.
Sharon: That’s true.
Stacey: Quite excessively, especially when there were family tickets available, there was that money incentive, to get a cheaper ticket and take everybody out for less than it would be by car.
Sharon: Well that’s the point isn’t it? If you could actually do it for less you would do it, but when you’ve already got a car…
Stacey: You’ve got to use it haven’t you, you’ve got to use it because you’re putting money into it and it wouldn’t make sense not to.
Sharon: I mean I do know people who are quite happy to live in London and not have a car, but then they’ve got a fantastic transport system and the same applies in the bigger cities, but Exeter seems to me particularly, to have a very poor infrastructure as far as the public transport goes. Whether that’s due to Stage Coach or not I don’t know.
Mike/Guy: Part of the problem is that all of the transport systems are there to make a profit, they’re not there to provide a service because if they’re going to provide a service and lose money they’re not going to do it unless it happens to be subsidised by generally speaking the County Council. And of course the County Council will say that we haven’t got the money, they were complaining that they’re cut from central government is so much less than some of the urban areas get that they just haven’t got the money to put. So when it stops being a public service and becomes a profit making venture, which it must be, for the railways with Virgin and all the rest of them round here, with Stage Coach and there’s the odd one by ?11.56 and that, if it’s not going to make money they’re obviously not going to run it, because they’re not going to subsidise the public out of their private pocket.
Mark: But they do already get significant public subsidies don’t they?
Mike: Oh yes, but Stage Coach particularly complain it’s not enough. I mean I have got a free bus pass, I do use it when I can get down to our bus stop, but unfortunately where I live at the moment, they’re having great fun and games with road works at the moment, it’s a bit of a bother. But then the Council’s are saying that we’re paying out so much on the free bus passes that central government aren’t paying enough, therefore we’ve got to take the money out of our other pots. So there’s no organised policy, there’s all bits and pieces from different organisations and companies.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. In view of transport policies I want to mention something here, the British government want to reduce carbon emissions till 2050 by 80% do you see that this is maybe reflected in some policy or what do you think about that?
Sharon: Well the only things that I see happening are that local government places are bringing in pay to park at your place of work. And within Devon County they are reducing the number of times you are allowed to bring your car into work to try and make you use public transport. Of course the downside of that is all of Devon County was brought in from the outer areas so there are people coming in from all over Devon, trying to get to Exeter and to do that on a daily basis or even two days a week, by public transport would elongate your day by hours.
Stuart: My father had to come from Biddeford to Exeter everyday and the nearest bus station, well the bus takes far to long and he would have to get up ridiculously early and the nearest train service was in Barnstaple which is I don’t know 20 minute drive away and so he literally has no choice from the start of his journey to get to Exeter. So I don’t know how they’re going to do that, 2050? The thing is like I keep hearing everyone saying that they’re making it harder for cars basically, but not very much easier for public transport. 
Stacey: There’s no balance is there.
Moderator: It’s not really integrated? Thanks. You said as far as I remember that you think there is some necessity for changes in travel behaviour. I just mentioned the 80% in carbon emissions that the government wants to achieve. Are there maybe other reasons for changing travel behaviour for you? What do you think? Lukas?
Lukas: To change travel behaviour? I think it all boils down at the end of the day if they want to encourage people there needs to be much more joined up thinking about how people need to travel. If they’ve got to travel by train and then by bus or whatever, they need to co-ordinate those things up and have them working together. I mean I recently came back from London on the train, it got back late in the evening, there was no buses so the only thing you had was taxi, and taxi, there was no thought about the last train gets in at whatever time it was 10:45 or whatever, the last bus was 10:15 or something and there were a lot of people on that train. And there was about 50 taxis, they were all waiting for taxis, whereas if there had been one or two buses, they would have saved absolutely. It doesn’t indicate to me there’s any thought. They think about it in the major things, but when it comes to the micro bit, just thinking how it could be done at a micro level, they’re not interested and that’s where I think the savings could be made, using the micro level, not the macro one.
Moderator: To mention something in addition to let’s say environment or resource or something like that did you have any problems with congestion or something like that you frequent car users?
Stacey: It’s been dreadful round Exeter recently, all the road works which is why I bought the scooter, because now I can get from one end of the city to the other in twenty minutes, where it would take me double that with all the road works going on. It’s been dreadful. 
Sharon: Well I think particularly since they changed the layout of Power Street, the centre of Exeter is appalling, you avoid that in a car. Why they do that, well you can only assume they do that to try and make you avoid it in the car, but actually what you’re actually doing is building up congestion therefore you must be getting a whole lot more emissions.
Mark: I’m fairly fortunate that I don’t have to travel in the rush hour through the city centre and so that aspect doesn’t really affect me a great deal, but on the odd occasion when I do get caught up in it I think my view is you just have to grin and bear it. You know I can’t see what the alternative would be?
Stacey: High blood pressure!
Mark: Well I think there’s no alternative to me not being in a car. You know I couldn’t have got to where I was going on a train very often, I would have had to take my wellingtons, disinfectant, wet weather gear, plus files, it’s so easy just to pop it in the car, if you’ve got to carry it it’s very different.
Guy: It comes back to what Sharon said about going down to the seafront and everything.
Mike: And of course the other thing with a car is it will probably take you from a to b, but if you go by public transport it will only get you so far to b, or so far away from a.
Stacey: And at present there is no way across the city centre, if I wanted to go to the hospital I have to catch two buses, there is no way around. It seems nonsense to me, it all goes into the city. You must have a circle route, it just doesn’t make sense to me.
Mike: I mean the only bus route that goes across the city I can think of like that is the b bus which goes from ?19.11 round out to Marsh Garden, that’s the only one.
Stacey: Yes and that’s…
Mike: Twenty minutes I think.
Moderator: Thanks. Another point on my list I want to ask you to think of the ideal world, travel wise, how everything is possible, where you could choose whatever you want and if you wanted to change your own travel behaviour, you already did some changes I think, how would you like to travel in an ideal world?
Sharon: Beam me up Scottie.
Moderator: And in terms of right now available transport? Would you still go for the car, or would there be some changes, what do you think?
Sharon: I would definitely choose a car.
Stuart: I would choose a bike, bicycle rather than a motorbike because it’s free.
Sharon: I assume you’re not married? No encumbrants.
Stuart: Yes, you know I don’t need to carry anything with me.
Mark: My view is that question is so difficult to answer because there are so many different reasons why you need to travel. If it’s one person on their own from city centre to city centre the train is fine. If it’s taking the family down to the seaside, a day out on the farm, to see relatives, then the practicalities these days of doing that on public transport is so great that I don’t even consider them.
Moderator: But in an ideal world I think you would have frequent public transport running from door to door or something like that, so if you want to choose public transport and this idea worked, you’re free to say that.
Stacey: It would be free. Public transport in an ideal world would be free.
Moderator: That was my next question. What changes?
Stacey: It would have to be free for me to sell the car and the bike it would have to be completely free.
Sharon: But the thing is you wouldn’t be able to sell it because nobody is going to buy it!
Mark: There is never going to be public transport to every single place you want to go to, or it’s going to be so infrequent that it’s not worthwhile having it.
Sharon: I would personally really enjoy using trains, but for one person, ok that’s possible and as long as you book your ticket far enough in advance so that you get a cheap rate. But if you just use a day trip, for example my daughter did it recently, on a railcard, a student railcard to Birmingham and it cost her over £50 and as you said got home, the train was delayed as well, another two hours anyway, no buses, had to get a taxi home. So it’s not feasible. I mean the ideal world that you’re suggesting I don’t think my imagination goes that far.
Moderator: It’s complicated I think.
Guy: I mean one of the things in an ideal world is that we would strip the size of cars. You see people in large, large cars, one person in a very large car. You would say that in an ideal world you’d produce very small cars and say right if you’re a single person you only need a small car, you don’t need a Mercedes or what have you. If you’re a single person you can drive round in that size. So you can restrict the size of the car to the size of the family or what have you that’s going to use it.
Mark: But surely that implies that you need one car for every situation?
Guy: No, what I’m saying is if you decide to have a car and you’re on your own the size of that car that you can purchase would be based on whether it was just for you or alone, or whether you had a family.
Mark: So I could have a bigger car than Stuart because I’ve got a family?
Guy: Yes
Mark: Even though I don’t always take the family with me.
Guy: I mean it doesn’t have to be a car for a single person, I mean just because you’re a single person you’re still going to have family or whatever, but the majority of your use would be for yourself, why do you need you know a whacking great, what do you call it Chelsea tractors or whatever they call it. 
Mark: I would say because occasionally you do need a car of that size.
Guy: You could hire one.
Stacey: You could swap it, you could borrow one, you could have a swap scheme, where if you were going on holiday….
Sharon: Of course that would be a good idea, you could have a car pool…
Mike: Well there are one or two round Exeter aren’t there, car shares…I don’t know how it works I don’t live out here, but I know there’s a car share round there.
Sharon: I mean they did try it with bikes didn’t they and that very soon fell over.
Stuart: They do that pass don’t they, where you can just swipe a card, take a bike across town and then swipe it back, I think that’s brilliant.
Sharon: I think they all end up in Amsterdam.
Guy: It also depends how old you are for bikes. When I was in the prime of my youth for want of a better way of putting it, I lived in the outskirts of London and I always used to cycle up through the West End, round Marble Arch. I could probably do it a lot quicker than people in cars and trains anyway, but the thought of doing it nowadays.
Stacey: Even if you were given an electric bike I think roads are so much more dangerous now, I mean on my scooter I have to watch out, they’re all idiots out there trying to get me, it’s dangerous.
Guy: The one thing I found cycling in London is if I got behind a bus or a taxi I was safe because nobody was going to hit them, but yeah it comes down to health again, there’s bikes, if you’re young enough, I used to cycle everywhere but now old age and disability’s come one me.
Stuart: What about if it was the law to pick up people? Like if you are in a four person car and like you said getting a bus, you just put your arm out, like hitch hike basically. I know it sounds really dangerous because you might get mugged and stuff, but if you put your arm out and if there’s a space in the car you have to get in, then that would sort a lot out because some people are just driving around because they can, because they’ve got a car and then those people just wouldn’t bother getting a car, because you know some people do struggle to have a car, they’re just buying it because they either need it for work purposes, but if you could just do that I think that would be great fun.
Guy: Well I must admit, before the troubles in Northern Ireland particularly, if I saw any service men thumbing a lift I always used to give them a lift.  But now they’re not allowed to thumb a lift and you’re always a bit wary of who you see trying to hitch a lift.
Stuart: It’s your private space so you don’t really want people coming in, but if it was socially acceptable then maybe.
Stacey: Change of culture maybe.
Mark: I mean I have picked up hitch hikers in the past but as you say it’s something that seems to have gone out of fashion these days. Partly perhaps because of people’s concerns about picking up strangers, are they going to be mugged or attacked. But I can see some merits in that, if it became the custom I’m sure quite a few people would be happy to go along with it.
Stacey: I mean more and more now where we’re getting to this stage where we’ll have ID cards so could there not be a swipe mechanism in the car, so you can say the government know about me, if you swipe then at least you’ve got a record, if there’s any problems then you’re traceable so you wouldn’t take the risk of mugging your kind person. We would all be taxi’s, we’d all be friends.
Stuart,: That’s mu ideal world.
Moderator: Yeah, which brings me to my next point. We have some daily troublesome areas and I want you to go through it and see if they are single or if there is a whole scenario that would work for you. And I have to mention that these are purely hypothetical, there’s nothing to be introduced in Exeter or around Exeter, so you don’t have to be afraid. It’s some improvements and some means of transport and some radical steps that are already discussed and I want to your views on that in view of changes in travel behaviour and I want to encourage you to think how different measures could be combined from each scenario and if you could pick out one that you think would work or that could be best for you. And as I said purely hypothetical and we’re just researchers and just in your opinion of these things. I’ll just give you some time to read through, go through it on your own, read it out. Yeah, scenario 1 includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements to public transport punctuality and reliability. New smart car ticketing and simpler introduced fares. Major improvements to cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements and increased taxation you pay directly for public transport measures. Scenario 2 is a little bit more drastic. Increased parking charges in urban areas, in some areas we already have it. Increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars emitting more pollutants. Congestion charges in most towns and cities, more toll roads, schemes like paying to drive, so you’ll pay more to drive further and payment to drive in congested areas. Or this would also result in major improvements in public transport from these taxes and also improve public transport services. And this would also reduce a significant reduction in congestion on major roads and on carbon emissions. And scenario 3, banning vehicles with high polluting engines, no car days may be. Full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones. Restrictions on the numbers of cars each household could own, or the size. Major and sustained decrease in traffic levels would be a result and switch over to public transport infrastructure and major reductions in carbon emissions as a result of this. So when it comes to these measures as I said feel free to think what would work for you or what you think will never work, so yeah let’s just open the discussion. 
Guy: I mean its ?31.11 where it says pay to drive where you pay more to drive further I would turn that on it’s head and say the other way round – that you pay more for short journeys, because that’s where people, I think a lot of carbon emissions are made, people literally drive from their house to the shop down the road and drive back again. Whereas if you said every time you take your car out for every mile, the first mile would cost you an absolute fortune and every mile you drive after that the cost decreases. So if you did a fifty mile journey the cost would be quite low. If you drive a mile then the cost would be very high.
Stuart: Scenario 3 is idyllic isn’t it really. I like the switch over to a public transport focussed infrastructure, that doesn’t mean to say that you can’t drive, but if public transport was as it is, getting like Zurich or Geneva, like Switzerland, they’ve got it sorted don’t they? And they don’t need, they can rely on it basically which I think is something that England doesn’t have. And if it was completely focussed on that. And then also like, I don’t think that there should be a huge amount of all this increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes because that doesn’t put people off driving. I understand that that money will go back into like transport, public transport, but I don’t think that people still drive. That’s not putting them off and making people go to public transport it’s just making public transport better but it’s not increasing the amount of people that are using. No car days, that’s out of the question. I mean Exeter is part pedestrianised in the town centre isn’t it, so I think that’s a good idea. There isn’t much need to go and park and pull up outside McGuyald’s is there. Restrictions on the car, number of cars each household could own, I think that’s a good idea. I don’t think there’s a need, if there’s three cars for a two people household sort of thing, that’s a bit stupid. Yeah maybe one per person at the most I think.
Stacey: It’s still too many I think.
Sharon: It all depends on the needs doesn’t it. I mean if you have three adults living in a house who all go off in different directions, they’re not going to be able to use one car.
Stuart: But then maybe it meant car sharing.
Stacey: But they just haven’t got the room.
Sharon: Perhaps the people who should be targeted are those who, like Montague at Beaulieu who have thousands of them. Perhaps he should just have that one car.
Moderator: So Sharon what are your views on these measures, potential measures?
Sharon: Well, like Stuart scenario 3 is the only one that would appeal in any kind of shape or form. In scenario 1, obviously if you could improve public transport punctuality and reliability that would be good, but it’s not enough. The smart card, are you talking about something like the oyster card? I think that’s brilliant, absolutely superb, it really speeds up the traffic flow and I don’t know why other cities haven’t taken that on board. Ken Livingstone did something else! The major improvements for cycling facilities, Stuart saving your presence, Exeter have had thousands of pounds shoved in to making all these cycle routes and I have to say as a car driver I am incensed every time I pass a cyclist who is not using those cycle ways. And I think that perhaps measures should be brought in to make them use them.
Stacey: If it’s there they should use it or get fined.
Guy: Or the public footpath seems to be the favourite for a lot of them.
Stuart: Cyclists seem to not take a dis-regard for we’re supposed to be on the road or we’re supposed to be on the pavement and if it’s a red light and there’s a way to get onto the pavement before the red light, they’ll get on, then nip off afterwards. So yeah maybe improvements in cycling facilities, if they had their own lane they had to use it and not go on the paths. I agree if they improved them
Stacey: And policed them.
Sharon: Another issue in my particular case which I am sure is the same in many other is I returned to work as soon as my children were old enough to go to school and then you are the major one who is called on every time dear, sweet person falls over and cuts their head open or something like that. So the idea of actually trying to get back in a panic to the hospital or the school or whatever by public transport was a no no. I mean in our case we had one car, I drove it and my husband cycled. But that was in order to have the facility there if needed.
Guy: I mean scenario 3 where it says major reductions in carbon emissions much of that is down to a) the design of car engines and b) how the car is driven anyway. I mean if you see somebody roaring along at 30 or 40 miles in second gear as though they’re at Silverstone or Brands Hatch. And of course the other problem is with carbon emissions, the 20 mile an hour, it’s a balancing act I’m sure, but where you’ve got these 20 mile an hour speed limits all round town, they’re excellent because they’re for safety reasons, but in my car, and it’s not a big one, I’m chugging round in second gear because if I go up any further it all starts hunting and I’ve got to drop back down again, so that in itself increases the emissions anyway. There that is a balancing act, carbon emissions one hand and public safety, especially near schools on the other. And to keep to 20 miles an hour is exceedingly difficult. 
Stacey: Even on a scooter it’s difficult.
Guy: I mean I’m lucky I’ve got a cruise control on my car because it’s a motability car so I can actually put it down, but you get a long line of traffic behind you if you’re doing 20 miles an hour. You see people weaving to one side waiting to get passed.
Stacey: And I think really, I like the 20 mile an hour limit I do, I think that does make me feel safer as a driver, but I think they should just blanket the whole city, because quite often I have to check where I am, am I 20 mile an hour? Which is a big grey area and there’s lots of little traps around town, someone I know who’s just taken a taxi driving license, he fouled a bit and he knew in his mind that he was in a 30 mile an hour, but it wasn’t it was a gap of hundred yards or so, so he failed miserably, he was very cross. But either it is all 20 or not. Or all the side roads maybe, but not bits of routes, it’s so confusing.
Mike: That bit of road that comes round by ?39.46 there’s no, I come by there quite frequently between ?39.51 and ?39.52 and cars race up there, 40, 50 mile an hour it’s a 30 mile an hour limit within there. And I actually wrote to the council and said why can’t you put up 30 mile an hour things and they just didn’t look, it’s silly there. They don’t make it clear enough, where it is either 30 or 20 there ought to be, it’s all very well putting up a sign at the beginning and at the end there ought to be signs during the spacing so that you know you’re still within that limit. Make much more sense.
Stuart: Well I think with all these scenarios, for the whole travel it’s cost, how much it cost to travel bus or car. Car for the environment seems to be a major issue and there was another one, cost, environment and I don’t know. But I don’t know how much money the government are putting into, because eventually the energy’s going to run out, then have they got any contingency plans for this or are they just spending loads of money on public transport which is using petrol and then what?
Stacey: A lot of buses are going electric now aren’t they?
Stuart: Yeah so why don’t they spend more of the money instead of doing these major improvements for public transport from the tax revenues and getting major reductions to carbon emissions. Instead of getting fewer cars they don’t make the cars as Guy was saying earlier, make the cars less pollutant. 
Guy: I mean for fuels there are these hybrids where some of them run on electric and there’s some that run on this bio fuel, but I do know one chap where unfortunately it was a bit cold and it started to solidify and the car ceased working would you believe at Granada services so he caused a major jam there. But the production emissions a lot of it is mainly down to entire design, that they’ve got a design that works and they’ve all basically stuck with it. And at school I think they should it calls ?42.29 and that was it and everybody stuck with it.
Stuart: So on that basis I’d agree with scenario 3.
Mark: I think from my point of view there’s very little in any of these scenarios that would appeal to me directly, or I think is compatible from a wider point of view. And I think a lot of them almost illustrate how muddled the government thinking is you know are they trying to reduce congestion, are they trying to get us out of the cars completely. You know why are they trying to get us out of cars? You know one or two of these things might work, like I can see some advantage in perhaps having a no car day, if people knew every Tuesday there were no cars they could work around that.
Stuart: But could you work around that?
Sharon: You’d just work on a Saturday instead wouldn’t you?
Mark: I work from home two or three days a week anyway.
Stuart: What if you had a client that needed to see you on Tuesday?
Mark: I was just going to say I do occasionally have to go to public enquiries and they’re invariably on a Tuesday so I suppose it wouldn’t work.
Stuart: Yeah maybe the internet has made these things far easier to do, you know you don’t need, you don’t have to drive 20 miles down the road to see people you can just use open web links and stuff. Maybe educate, maybe more people with computers might help with car congestion.
Stacey: You can’t have a party at one house and all your friends be at the other, you’ve got to get together as a group.
Moderator: Thank you very much so far. The next issue to ask you about, again a set of scenarios. Unfortunately holiday travel is pretty much related to environmental effects and carbon emissions at the moment. So all I want to ask you about again purely hypothetical holiday travel scenarios and again I would ask you to point out what you think about these thinks and if there’s something that would work for you or if you want to combine single points from certain scenarios, your general views on these things. So again I’ll go through these three scenarios quickly. Scenario 1 includes encourage carbon off-setting schemes, we already have some of those. Incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs which has already been mentioned. Provide and ?45.23 schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave for using them. Some companies have already introduced that, people are getting one more day of holiday if they go by train.
Sharon: I thought you meant a couple of weeks!
Moderator: That’s just the start. Incentivise UK holidays, so more or less regional and UK holidays perhaps through tax price and not paying VAT for UK holidays. Scenario 2 a little more radical again, increase air passenger tax, add duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown. Tax air figures based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane or one result could be invest tax revenues into developing more ?46.14 in the UK. And scenario 3, relatively similar but comprehensive, focussing on carbon emissions. Provide citizens with carbon budgets restricting the amount of carbon intensive activities like flying, daily travel, energy use at home that they can undertake. So yes again open discussion.
Stacey: Sorry scenario 3, what form would that take?
Stuart: You would have something like 5 tonnes of carbon a year.
Sharon: And then you could buy a few more on the black market I assume.
Stacey: I was just thinking I’d probably have excess amount so it …
Guy: How would it be measured?
Stuart: See I like that, I do actually like that scenario 3. That’s quite big brother really like you know, you can only have this much, sort of restricting you. If it was your gap year and you wanted to fly round the year and you can’t because of this carbon budget that would be pretty annoying.
Stacey: You’d have to save up…
Stuart: If you could save up and you didn’t go travelling for like ten years then that would be OK.
Sharon: You could borrow some off mum and dad
Mark: I listened to David Lilliband talking before he was foreign secretary, I can’t remember what position he was in and he was desperate to say that the government didn’t want to restrict people from driving a car, or going on holiday by plane and therefore scenario 3 seems to me the best way of trying to sort all this out. Where you can say to people if you want to drive a big car fine, you know drive to work fine, but it’s within a total budget of x pounds or something
Guy: I mean we live our lives by budgets so that’s not changing it, it’s just adding another element to that budget.
Stacey: I liked scenario 1 the last option incentivise UK holidays through tax breaks or not paying VAT for UK holidays I mean that would generate a lot more money within the UK. It would help our economy and there is some fantastic places within the UK to visit. I’ve never really felt the need to go outside of the UK. And I say I like that idea.
Mark: Not for sunshine?
Moderator: At least not the last two years.
Stacey: I suppose I’m fortunate I don’t have a young family anymore, I meant feel differently if they were small.
Moderator: Sharon?
Sharon: Well I think the best incentive to not go abroad is the exchange rate.
Moderator: At the moment yeah you’re right.
Sharon: Which has prevented us from doing our usual twenty holidays this year. Next year we hope to resume, but seriously you’ve got to accept that the human being will do whatever they can for themselves and generally speaking we’re a selfish bunch and we will all do whatever we want to do if we can do it. And you’ll either have to do what Stuart says and bring in the big brother and you cannot do this, and scenario 3 looks very nice but my cynical side thinks that there will be any number of people who will know a way around it. And it will be the ordinary mortal who gets stuffed every time.  I don’t know.
Mark: It’s riddled with problems, do you do it per person or per family and do you differentiate between poorer people who can’t afford ?50.34 and more wealthy people who can say ?50.41
Stacey: And buy extra points you know
Sharon: I can’t remember which minister it was who cycled and actually had his car following him behind him, it wasn’t that long ago was it?
Mark: David Cameron
Sharon: Well, ok, you know I would do that too. I’ll cycle if somebody comes along with all my baggage.
Mark: I think to be fair to him that was because he had all his boxes and other stuff in the car.
Sharon: In which case he was actually blocking the road by cycling.
Moderator: Guy?
Guy: Yeah I mean I was looking at scenario 1, it says encourage carbon off-setting schemes. That seems to me to defeat the object really because all it means is that if I’m not using my, or the companies usually are not using their quota, they just hand it over to somebody else. So company A’s not using it, so company B wants to use more so it has company A’s quota, so it seems to me it’s defeating the object of encouraging company B to be more efficient in it’s carbon emissions. You know I’m thinking of people like the Post Office for instance and all going round in their vans or DHL or TNT or all these people they’re going to have quite enormous carbon emissions simply because of the vehicles they use and so they’ll happily probably buy and it comes down to scenario 3 I suppose, but they’ll probably happily take some off-sets from other people who are not using them which seems to defeat the object to making them more efficient. They’ll just use their financial clout to skip round that and buy them off of company A. As for the UK holidays I mean that’s probably quite a good idea because so many places, we live in Devon, Cornwall we’re so reliant on the tourist trade that that probably may well have a great attraction for them. I don’t know about scenario 2 because for my sins I’ve never been in an aeroplane, I’ve only been in a helicopter once and that was hovering over Silverstone for about ten minutes, but it does seem to me that if you increase all these things you do end up with a large number of very disgruntled holiday makers.
Stuart: It does seem very like, restricting people just purely on the money basis which I don’t think that’s fair at all like taxing aviation fuel, whose going to pay for that really? It’s going to be the people that pay for it in the end. Taxing passengers by the distance flown, no, rich people will be able to afford it, poor people won’t, I just don’t think that’s fair basically.
Mark: Life isn’t.
Stuart: No, I think that’s quite cynical. I mean taxing things is fair enough as long as tax goes to the right place, but it never does, so I wouldn’t agree with taxing everything.
Moderator: Thanks.
Stacey: Who needs a high speed rail line? We live in a very small country.
Stuart: I would like that. I have to travel between Exeter and London a lot and it can take, because I got the cheap train as well it took three and a half hours, like I couldn’t afford the two and a half hour train so I had to get the three and a half hour train. And I had to get a train from their to Sidcup so it’s five hours door to door but if I could have done that in a couple of hours, two or three hours then that would make a huge difference to me. In fact people from Basingstoke would easily be able to commute and people from Bristol maybe could easily commute to London.
Mark: I think that illustrates another contradiction in government policy. You know they try to get us to reduce the O2, cut down on it yet they suddenly come up with this idea of high speed trains.
Stuart: So we can all travel further…
Guy: And of course the trouble with it is the sheer cost of putting in the high speed rail lines. I mean they’re so many millions of pounds a mile so the cost and the time, well certainly the cost is colossal and the time is usually, look at the time it’s taken to do a high speed line from London down to the tunnel.
Stuart: In Japan don’t they have those trains that work on magnets? Is that just me? Aren’t they like unbelievably good carbon emissions and they’re unbelievably fast too. I think that would be quite good. Maybe only like up to Edinburgh and back but a couple of those in the UK wouldn’t be that bad.
Sharon: Well it was like you were saying about the circular routes around Exeter, why not have something similar that maybe two or three circles, an inner, an outer and a middle round the country. I mean I do appreciate the cost involved. Well, no I don’t.
Guy: But I mean if you go back to your circular route London’s got the M25 and it’s really been classified as the biggest car park in the world. I used to go up there quite often and every time I went up there they’d stuck another lane on the M25 but the traffic wasn’t moving any faster at all and the only time it moves fast is about two or three o’clock in the morning when any sensible person is at home in bed anyway. So it comes back to what we started the first time, is the whole co-ordinated transport thing, including roads which would then bring in the holiday traffic, because they all come charging down from mostly the M5 from up north and on the M4. I went up to London last Sunday week, they’re doing some road works there and we just crawled along about two or three miles an hour all the time. And my step-daughter went up there the week before and actually got stuck off there because this chap was trying to jump off the thing and couldn’t move, the transport couldn’t be arranged so they could keep the traffic, she was stuck there for about five hours, didn’t move. Luckily, my wife calls it a wendy house on wheels, the boyfriend calls it a motor home, so they were able to do things. But there was no way of being able to organise that traffic to get through.  It seems to me that the amount of carbon emissions that must have poured out of those things again it’s something somebody wants to think about. If you have a breakdown in such and such a place then we ought to be able to organise the traffic to get off the motorway. Particularly the M5 and M6 and so forth, they’re used for holiday traffic.
Stuart: …sat nav’s, like we were stuck on the M5 to Bristol is it? We were stuck there for about an hour and there was a turning off and we knew that if we went down this turning off there was a chance that we could go round it. But if sat nav’s could tell you there’s a queue here, go around it, that would work as well.
Guy: There should be something like. It comes back to designs and so forth.
Stacey: That’s what the radio’s for.
Stuart: Oh yeah I forgot about them
Stacey: It says whatever you do avoid this road.
Guy: My wife chides me I’m afraid because if I see two cars it constitutes a traffic jam and I take the first left or right, whichever comes first.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. Approximately sixty minutes, I’m nearly over so I have one last question for you. A very general question again to round it up a little bit. Assuming there would be a chance to get you to change your travel behaviour what are the key messages you need to hear, from whom and what policies need to change? Again if you can think of any of these, no matter how impossible they seem at the moment, but what do you need to hear and from whom and what policies do you think could work for you?
Mark: I think if the government are trying to see this to us from the point of view that it’s better for the nation and better for the world there ought to be a much greater element of public subsidy to encourage us to use trains, buses and public transport, rather than just trying to price us all off the road.
Stuart: I agree with that, they could stop the high prices with cars and incentives should be more on free.
Guy: Because it maybe cheaper for me to travel on the train but as soon as I’ve got a passenger it’s much cheaper for us to use the car. I mean putting aside the convenience of getting from a to b, the sheer costing of the travel, it’s cheaper for us to go in the car anyway, not withstanding the price of petrol and so forth. And of course with the railways I mean they’re ticketing schemes are so complicated you almost want to come up to university to get a degree in it. I mean there’s so many different schemes.
Stuart: Yeah I think that we need to hear from the powers that be, the government and I think world leaders as well, like ok we’ll stick with England, to say we’ll make it free, or make it more reliable and more environmentally friendly, I think those three things are the most important. 
Moderator: Lukas any ideas?
Lukas: Well yeah I just think the government, whoever is actually covering at the time they just need to, instead of just switching policy whatever seems the flavour of the month at the time, they ought to have a strategy which should be followed through continuously whatever the change of government or whatever, there should be a policy laid out and that should be followed on and on and on. And if they did that then perhaps we’d get somewhere. But what you get is as soon as the government changes priorities change, in transport they change the policy, change the priority. And as soon as they change priority then things just go back to where they start.
Moderator: Sharon?
Sharon: Well locally I see lots of people travelling to work where they used to work where they lived but companies join and therefore the people all have to move to somewhere to keep their job, so I think perhaps the government could promote smaller companies. You know like hospitals, the cottage hospital where people felt loved and cared for. Well now they’re all shovelled into the RDNE, you haven’t got a clue where you are etc etc. Which means that if you want your treatment you have to come down from Biddeford to Exeter, whereas you could have, I don’t actually know if there was a hospital in Biddeford, but you get the idea. And I think if you de-centralised an awful lot of stuff you would cut out an awful lot of travel. And the other thing is breed horses.
Stacey: I’ve just scribbled myself bring back British Rail, we’ve got the knowledge now and the technology that the rail services have improved, which is why you know it was privatised, so buy it back, get it back so that we have one central standardisation of tickets, timing, timetables, everything. Bit drastic but.
Guy: Yes and of course the railway doesn’t have any rails that it runs on. I was in the special constabulary for 27 years and one of my colleagues was a train driver and he told me that British Rail was broken up into 113 different companies. As you say it’s…
Sharon: Mind you it’s all cyclical isn’t it. Because before it became British Rail it was the Great Western and the Southern and all this, so just wait a few years and it will all come back.
Stacey: I hope so it might bring the price of the tickets down.
Moderator: OK. Thank you very much, that’s it.
Mark: Can I just ask what you’re doing this research for? You were talking about we at the start. Tape ends 64.53