Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Welcome to you all, welcome everybody.  Thank you very much for being here, it is really helpful to us.  As I said to you in recruiting when we select a group of people, we are doing a relaxed discussion about your travel behaviour, what means of transport you use for you daily travel and so on, and come to some issues if you have behaviour change and so and so forth.  First thing I would ask you is a short introduction around maybe starting on my left.  My name is Moderator I am the researcher here at Exeter University in the department of Geography and if you tell me your first name and maybe what you are doing – anything you want to tell the people.
Simon: My name is Simon, I am a student Nurse, I’m back for the summer holidays, that’s about it really.
Tom: My name is Tom.
Sandra: I’m Sandra, I’m a widow and I’m retired.
Emily: I’m Emily and I’m a secretary at home. 
Sean: I’m Sean and I’m a part time maintenance at a school. 
Albert: I’m Albert and I teach at Exeter College.
Claire: I’m Claire and I’m a full time student at Exeter College.
Joe: I’m Joe, I’m a student, at the moment I’m on a year out.
Moderator: That’s great, thank you very much.  First thing I want to ask you (if you could just pass this around here), this is a little bit different (I am also asking you only for your first name to make sure you don’t have to be concerned about the recording, nothing is related to your address or your full name we have strong data protection rules and no body track it back so I hope its ok we record it because we want to have your comments), first thing I want to ask you is to fill out this form just your first name in the corner.  Do you have pens?   
Moderator: Ok thank you everybody, first point I’ll just explain how it works. I would ask you to let just one person at a time to speak and just let one person speak and then if you have some comments or if you wan to reflect on the same thing then just wait until I ask you about that and you can step up.  Or if somebody has finished and you have to say something immediately just go ahead, but make sure just one person at a time speaks please that would be nice.  The issue is your travel behaviour in general and the first question I will ask you is ‘Which modes of transports do you usually use?’ and I’m really interested in how you go to work or for shopping or for leisure and week ends and especially if there are major differences between these different purposes I would say.  Tom  maybe.
Tom: I live in Exeter, I work in Barnstable. To get to Barnstable I cycle to down to the station, I leave my bike there, I catch a train to Barnstable and then I walk a half mile the other end.  I do that for preference because I like Public Transport, it is possible to drive regularly obviously but it’s much more expensive than using the trains which are comparatively cheap at the moment.
Albert: I cycle everywhere really and years ago I made a decision not to use a car again, about fifteen years ago, and so far I haven’t.  But I do have a conflict in terms of I was married to a Canadian and I’ve got family over there and occasionally I have to fly.  But most of the time I’m cycling, walking, I’ve got a canoe, I take my holidays in my Canadian canoe which is in the Haden banks, I go on cycle holidays and bus and train.  So I’ve got no personal car at all.
Moderator: Ok.  ‘Who’s using the car?’ Joe?
Joe: I do have a car but I don’t use it to go to work because that’s in town so I’m happy to walk into town or cycle, but I used to go to university in Edinburgh obviously it is quite a long way so I have flown, but I do normally or I did normally catch the train because I don’t mind how long it takes, although it is quite expensive flying as well.  I kind of agree with you in that I would love to not have to drive, I just kind of feel like there’s not much of an alternative, because to me it seems to work out the same to drive or not financially, but it is so much more convenient, and I can take people with me and stuff as well.  I sort of feel a bit guilty about that though.
Simon: Being a student nurse I go on lots of different placements around Hampshire and depending on the distance depends on mode of travel really.  If it’s close by I’ll try and cycle, having said that if it’s winter I tend to get in the car because it’s seven o’clock in the morning it’s freezing and cycling a few miles doesn’t really appeal to me.  It might change I don’t know, but in the summer I do try and cycle as much as I can
Sean: I think I would say I walk most places in town because it’s pointless taking a car.  I’ve worked in town for over twenty years and I walked every day there and back, it was just so much quicker and less hassle.  I could do bus because I’m over sixty so I have a card but I always find I get to the bus stop just as the bus has gone up the road, that is very frustrating so I tend to walk and I no cycle to work as well.
Emily: We work from home so don’t use the car really until I have to go shopping and that’s because its heavy bags and I’d find that difficult, but I do like to walk where I can.  So if I going to town I’ll walk, if it’s raining I’ll get a bus and local shopping I’ll walk to Hebitree to get the local stuff and enjoy walking down by the quay, that’s one of my little you know…
Moderator: Just for pleasure or?
: For pleasure yeah.
Moderator: I mean it’s another purpose for travel you know, just going for a walk and these things and it is also a part of your travel behaviour. Sandra is it maybe different for you or?
Sandra: I suppose yes, I didn’t keep the car when my husband died. I’ve always walked a lot anyway and I like walking I was brought up to walk, we lived in the country for a long time.  I go to a class once a week which is at Countyswiggers so I either get two busses or I go with a friend in her car.  The shops are convenient I walk to town I walk to Heavitree shops and that’s about it really.  I do go to Yorkshire sometimes my family – part of may family – live in Yorkshire and I sometimes go by plane, but I have tried the coach but of course it a long, long day journey so I don’t really (cough) and that’s about it really. 
Claire: As you know I don’t live in Exeter I live outside it in Ottery so really to get to college my only way of getting there is by bus which is fine, and if I get a lift into the park and ride then I’ll use a the park and ride.  But sometimes if I’m staying at a friends house or Rube’s house in Exeter I will walk into college and I’ll walk back, but if I’m going out in the evening the last bus into Exeter is about half six seven o’clock so sometimes I get a lift in, and if I go to see the family in Birmingham then I’ll take the train.  We try not to use the car a lot because does cost quite a lot of money for my parents but sometimes it’s just more convenient to use the car than public transport. That’s about it.
Moderator: Ok thanks a lot.  Simon you said you came by car and you sometimes use your car, I just want to ask you ‘what do you like about using your car and maybe are there some things you don’t like?’
Simon: I don’t like the petrol crisis particularly.  I just like being able to jump in it and just go when I want and it wont take me long to get where ever I want to go.  I don’t like traffic at all so avoid rush hour.  I don’t know - I suppose it a bit lazy really.
Moderator: That’s ok, really.  Anybody else maybe?
Tom: I used to like diving twenty years ago it’s incredibly awful really xxxxxxxx 13:13 it just something, there are certain places in Exeter you just don’t go if you drive I mean going down to Exbridges roundabouts for example on Saturday or Sunday you know you’re going to be tailed back all the way back to the inner ring road.  If I have to drive, we share one car my wife has to use it to get to work, and if I have to drive I prefer to actually detour to get to places rather than jus sit there and fret.  And I’ve noticed Devon in particular has got this awful habit where they put you into two lanes coming into a junction and then immediately slam them back into one just after, so all the idiots come screaming past because they can’t be bothered to queue.  I find driving in Exeter very frustrating.
Moderator: Ok
Sean: Cycling in Exeter can be just as frustrating.  You get onto a piece of bicycle path and about two hundred yards down the road it just disappears and I find that very frustrating, and also then you’re joining back into the traffic again.
Tom: I mean I cycle and I see idiot on bike who just go straight across the red lights as well and it’s some of them are just as bad on bikes some of them are just as bad in cars.  Give people the freedom to behave like complete idiots and they’ll take the chance when ever they can.
Albert: I think that when you’re biking, I must say I jump red lights all the time, I go up on the path, I get off if there is a pedestrian because I think they have a priority.  But if I’m at a traffic light and there’s a bus behind me and I know it’s absolutely clear - there’s a green signal there for pedestrians - I go because it’s safer for me to get fifty yards ahead of that bus, I feel vulnerable. And I’m quite prepared to pay fifty or a hundred pounds fine a year for jumping red lights I do it all the time, and its safer for me to ride on the path much safer but I do respect pedestrians and I completely understand pedestrians getting freaked out by crazy cyclists, but I go on the path and get off if there’s a pedestrian you know.
Tom: I started riding on the path at Seventrees since South West Water have dug up Heavitree because if you come down to the Polsloe bridge traffic lights there’s now invariably a half mile queue, and I’m starting to do exactly what you’ve said is put my own safety (first), and because I bike down to pick up my daughter from nursery I’m not prepared to put her at the chance of actually coming to major junction where somebody else is you know in a car is doing idiocy.
Albert: And also I think with such a car addicted society actually very few people walk.  I can cycle all the way along Topsham road and not meet a pedestrian.  And some of them now sensibly they are becoming joint cycling and walking paths, but actually I think it should all be joint but there should be a rule that you should get off your bike if there is a pedestrian you know it think if they made that rule...  Because it’s all about actually things work better under a state of anarchy don’t they?  In Sweden these day as soon as you get rid of traffic lights you get a much better flow of traffic because once you put the traffic lights up there’s a whole gap between when one lot can go and the other lot stopped and they’ve found out now that actually you just let people go create a state of anarchy and rely on peoples good (sense).
Claire: I saw that programme.  I just wondered if you could back that p actually, is that true?
Sean: That’s why we’re getting all the traffic lights in Exeter then because they’re sending them all over here you know.
Albert: We’re a nation of, we love rules in this country we love them.  There are signs up for dog shit, for anything we can put a sign up ‘don’t do this’ we do, I’ve lived in Canada for twenty years and that psychological freedom you get with not being told all the time what to do is just fantastic.  So I’m a bit of an anarchist I’ll cycle, I’ll break all the rules, but I’m respectful and I realise there is a hierarchy you know.
Simon: At least you’re cycling though at least you’re cycling and not driving.
Albert: Exactly I’m on the side of the angels you  know
Moderator: We don’t want to judge you, I mean if you have to use your car sometimes
Albert: Well you’ve got to judge, I mean what gives the last three generations the right to use up all the worlds oil supplies when you think, I can’t believe we’re doing this what gives our generation the right to use up all this-the worlds-oil. What about the next hundred generations?
Moderator: Albert sorry to stop you we’ll maybe come back to this later, I’m pretty sure we will.  But I for instance notice that Sandra said something about using the bus a little heck of a journey so to say, ‘what do think about the bus what do like about using the bus and do you maybe dislike some things?’
Sandra: I don’t particularly like the busses but they’re convenient.  And yes it’s difficult, it’s like coming here today I had to wait about half an hour for the bus which I think was so bad, I think it was not so much the bus as the traffic.  Normally they’re not too bad, we’re quite luck with our routes aren’t we, we have a couple of busses that run into the city, but I do walk an awful lot and that’s partly to keep fit because I need to keep fit.
Moderator: Ok thanks a lot.  One other thing, you may remember I don’t know it’s sometimes hard to recognise, did you recognise or when did your travel mode or behaviour change last can you recall that?  For instance I don’t know if changed for you since the rising petrol prices occurred Simon
Simon: Yeah to an extent I mean especially with the petrol stations running out of petrol, they haven’t got any so you can’t drive anywhere.  But I don’t know really, it’s a seasonal thing for me to be honest it’s definitely a seasonal thing, I do enjoy cycling in the summer but dislike it in the winter so.
Sean: I think with me our travel patterns changed when our children left home.  Because you’re taking them places you know you’re a taxi firm really, and once that stops you can decide to be freer travel by bus bike or whatever.  I think that’s a point at which we change our travel.
Sandra: Mine was when my husband died because partly for financial reasons I didn’t keep the car and of course we used a lot before that for shopping and going to visit family and various trips out.  So that was when mine changed really but I don’t mind being without the car I don’t mind that at all, I don’t miss driving.  I’m quite pleased not actually now the traffic is so awful and now I’m older you know reactions aren’t the same.
Joe: I’d say mine very definitely changed on the third of December last year when passed my driving test.  So I haven’t been driving that long but I really like it because it’s an amazing portal out of Exeter which I find very sort of confining, and I think local public transport in Exeter is a disgrace it’s ridiculously expensive and horribly unreliable and because of it did I found that I was kind of always relying on other people either to give me lifts places or just staying in town and I don’t know.  Now I can go out and go walking on Nutmoore and go to the beach and go with friends as well have a lot more fun, which is very sort of liberating I think for that reason I love driving.  And also driving itself is quite a pleasurable experience I find, especially when you’re not in town but I wish it wasn’t if you know what I mean sort of for the world.
Moderator: Thanks Joe
Tom: Four years ago I stopped doing lift shares to Barnstable and started catching the trains, I was convinced that if I drove myself on the way home in a car I’d kill my self within a year, and if fact the next time I drove up that road on a regular basis I had a ‘head on’ at Umberleigh and I think that proves the point.  But at the moment I’m spending four and half hours a day commuting and I’ve suffered quite a lot of ill health from getting up really early in the morning, cycling down the station and getting on a train at quarter to seven.  I leave home at twenty past six to go to work and I get back at half past six in the evening and I’m beginning to think about going back to doing a lift share again.
Moderator: Interesting that you brought this point up because I want ask you maybe you Tom did your way to travel influence your choice of place where you live, or is it somehow connected for you or was it the first choice that you said I want to go there and then I had to use the car in the first place or?
Tom: A job that came up and I went for it without really thinking about the transport implications.  I’m aware that fifty years ago I wouldn’t be doing the job because I wouldn’t have been able to travel, although I still think Devon’s got a nineteenth century transport system.  I’m also thinking about getting jobs back in Exeter so that I can commute easier and have more time with my fairly young daughter.  It’s not the longest commute I’ve done the longest commute I lived in Hitching and worked in Oxford which is a distance of sixty miles, I used the National Express coach to do that part of the time, car blew up after a while.
Moderator: How was it for you did you?
Albert: I don’t know I suppose I lived in Canada for all those years and I was incredibly, used up so much of the worlds oil myself, I had a Volkswagen Vesner as an old hippy drifting round Mexico and Central America and just driving and then I thought I’d get an eight cylinder car because you know like a duster was a hot car you know and I got an eight cylinder car and used to just go.  It was like driving a plane you know it was amazing, going between Montreal and Toronto and it was, and then suddenly I realised when I, actually it was when I moved to the countryside and built a house on a lake and then realised this is stupid I’ve got to commute from here.  I’m in paradise when I’m there but I had to commute I was teaching in Holloway and living up in the lake on the lakes you know, and it really got to me it really hurt me and I just once I came back to England I had a car for a very short time and I think it’s like I feel I’ve had my share really. Although I still, you know if I go to Canada I did fly, I was working for a charity in Nepal I did three weeks volunteer work with a charity in Nepal and I flew and I really don’t want to fly again but I figure that the job was so important and very personally enriching job as well as good for the charity, I find it really difficult all of the decisions is very difficult I think.  But I feel very comfortable now not having a car, I feel absolutely very comfortable.
Moderator: Thanks Albert. I would ask Claire, you said you live Ottery St Mary do you wish you could use other modes of transport or maybe behave in a different way – I mean you said you have to use a car sometimes.
Claire: Well when I go to work on a Sunday there’s no bus service so I have to get a lift in to Exeter.  I wish I could drive myself because it would be, like Joe says, more liberating but I think that taking the bus is probably more environmentally friendly it better.  It’s not really easy on the pocket I mean I’m quite lucky because I’ve got a bus pass that lets me on the bus for free when I go to college but if I had to pay every day it’s about five eighty return and every day that got to cut into you pocket a little bit so I wouldn’t be too pleased about that.  But I suppose that’s the same amount as actually driving into Exeter that’s probably how much it would cost to go in and out from Ottery I think I don’t know.  It probably changed when I actually had to get the bus in because you know when I went to college, I used to go to school in Ottery but then I went to Exeter so I had to get the bus I had no other alternative.  I don’t mind getting the bus I just wish I had my own car, it would make it easier to go see my relatives and other places in the country as well rather than having to get on the train for hours and then you know I can just get in the car and go it would take me about one and half two hours.
Tom: That’s a ridiculous bus fare because it costs me less than that to get to Barnstable on the train and that’s an extra five miles. 
Claire: Really does it
Tom: It costs me four pounds sixty a day because I’ve got Deon rails card.
Claire: Blimey
Albert: It great value that is for going to Barnstable and back.
Tom: Ten quid a year on the rail card, it’s brilliant.
Claire: Blimey that’s actually really good.
Tom: Unfortunately they shut your station in nineteen sixty two didn’t they.
Claire: Yeah it’s just really expensive though that’s the problem.
Moderator: Anybody else, Maybe somebody who is not really happy with the way he travels or the transport modes he uses.  Do you wish you could use other means of transport maybe for some purposes or for your everyday I don’t know?
Simon: My first year at university was a lot different than my second because within my rent for halls came a free bus pass unlimited for the whole year.  And I drove up to university but didn’t use my car all year to be honest because I had this free bus card so just travelled round where ever I wanted in Southampton for free which is great, you know it’s just on a card you just swipe it and easy s that you’re on.  But the second year I moved into a student house and didn’t have that so back to driving around again so I mean if public transport was cheaper, a lot lot cheaper, then I’m sure I’d use it a lot more often to be honest.
Joe: It’s a big difference I noticed as well because when I was living in Edinburgh (because Edinburgh is about twelve miles long) the bus service in there is much better than here because there’s loads more people there obviously so it can sustain it, but it’s one twenty for a days pass anywhere in the city and the busses go absolutely everywhere like every kind of main road anywhere.  And then coming back down here from where I live which is just by Pulsoe Bridge it is one forty five for a single to town and it just makes me really angry I hate Stagecoach a lot.
Tom: My sister live in Morningside in Edinburgh and it is brilliant, and they are actually going to put in trams as well, and the one thing you miss when you come down here from a major city is there’s no integration, the busses don’t connect with the trains they’re all arterial they don’t go cross routes you know.  You need something like a bus station interchange at the station or something where every thing is integrated and as you say the prices for what they are is just ridiculous.
Claire: Other cities in Europe have actually go that same sort of system, like Hamburg has got brilliant public transport system it’s absolutely fantastic.
Tom: I mean I’ve lived and worked in London I did my teacher training and I’d catch one train connect to another one catch a bus across or the tube and the integration was good, compared to some European cities it’s still bad, but compared to Devon it’s you know.
Albert: It’s good in Canada.  Toronto’s brilliant you know you just get a ticket, go from bus to tram to underground you know it’s just brilliant yeah.
Sean: I think if you are going to do any sort of public transport it needs to be thought through by the powers that be as to what you do, and to do this sort of thing and take into account people with different needs.  I do a lot of long distance walking and I’ll fly to Scotland because it’s cheap, I don’t have so much of a problem with flying because I think there are hundreds of people (on the Flybe there’s one hundred and ten people flying) and if you put them all in a car that would be a problem.  So I don’t have too much of a problem with that but I just find that rail is just hopelessly expensive, busses I’m one of these unfortunate people that can’t read on motorised transport it makes me feel really ill so I have five hours of staring out the window you know.
Sandra: I can’t do anything in the car and that reminds me that my friends and I, well not all of them but, we’re mostly pensioners and we get a free bus pass which is very nice but we all agree that we would have been happy to have stayed it the half price as it was and the company to reduce all the fares slightly and we think that would be much fairer.
Albert: I agree I agree entirely I’ve got a free bus pass and it’s ridiculous when you guys get a, I really don’t need it – I use it because you know -  but I do think it’s nonsense really, it’s much too generous.  It’s fantastic really and as I work with the xxxxxx 32:04 and I go up and down to Plymouth and I go down there on the bus for nothing you know and back, and it’s just such a wonderful thing for me.  The only problem is the last bus back is at ten past eight which is terrible and then if I take a train which is quite reasonable its 5 pounds return on the train and if I want to see a play down there then the last train back is nine fifteen so, and there’s the midnight train at twelve twenty, no busses and there’s a train so I just have to hang out in a bar for three hours and end up being in St David’s station at one thirty and I usually have my bike down there but that could be improved a lot I think.  A train at eleven when people are leaving the theatre or bus it doesn’t matter but there’s nothing and between two major cities like that.
Tom: Its geared up to when they want to actually run them rather than when people want them.  In a previous life I spent ten years working for the bus company in Oxford before they were privatised and when I started working there we could get people from literally from Lands End to John o’Grotes with timetables for the whole country and by the time I’d finished in nineteen eighty nine we could transport people about sixty or seventy miles and we got no indication of what happened the other side of the county boundary.  But I’d freely admit it, it was a question of ‘oh when can we run a bus to that town? Well we’ve got one free at this time lets send it out then’ it wasn’t a question of there are on hundred and fifty people need one at this time.
Moderator: Thank you very much, I will come back to something Sean mentioned you said you sometimes fly to Scotland that’s obviously holiday travel, I would now ask you to think about holiday travel and maybe I’ll start with Emily, can you say how often do you go on holidays and what are your preferred places and especially how do you go there what means of transport do you use?
Simon: I go to London on the train to see my daughter.  Occasionally fly to Spain that’s probably about once in five years I like to have a holiday there or France and usually Europe, on the ferry possibly xxxxx 34:29 cross on the ferry to Brittany down through, so that’s car isn’t it yeah car.
Sandra: Well I haven’t been abroad for a couple of years but I go to Yorkshire an visit my family, I’ve got another family in Lincolnshire.
Moderator: How o you go there?  What means of transport do you use for these trips?
Sandra: Well I have gone by coach and the last two times I have flown, and then gone between the family’s by car and I’m going to Bristol by train in a short while (40 days).  Last year I went by coach to Cornwall but apart form that, I mean we did a lot of travelling when my husband was alive, but just the last couple of years I haven’t.
Moderator: Ok thanks.  Tom
Tom: I think I’m probably unique at this table in that I wont ever fly.  I have this irrational fear that the particular bit of the aeroplane I am in is going to actually become detached from the main body and I will plummet screaming to my death.  It wasn’t always like that, I remember flying when I was young, but I am able to actually determine that when I started being afraid of planes is when I parachuted when I was in my teens and after that every aeroplane was a lethal machine.  If, I mean quite a lot of my family live in Scotland and if my eighty year old father was genuinely ill then will get in an aeroplane and I will go up there but I wouldn’t ever use an aeroplane for a holiday simply because I would spend two weeks beforehand worrying about it and I’d spend the whole two weeks of the holiday worrying about the flight back, and it seems to me that life is not worth it.  So any time we go abroad you know France or Germany or whatever, we drive or boat or have done Eurostar, so far we’ve avoided whatever happens if we want to go to Australia or America by not going there and if my there and half year old daughter ever decides to emigrate it’s going to be a real bugger frankly.
Albert: Yeah I like George Mombial in the Guardian he said that the only reason for flying is for love and so one of my best friends daughters was getting married in Ireland and I’ve always loved that family so I did fly Ryan Air to Ireland for a wedding, and then occasionally (once every for or five years) I go fly to Canada just to check on all my family over there and that’s love I think. But I try not to fly and I’m like you I don’t like it, but I did fly to Nepal last year to work for this charity so I’m a contradiction I cycle everywhere and I get in planes now and again.  And I do disagree with it, I think plane travel is absolutely devastating for the environment in terms of how much oil its using and stuff compared with cars.
Tom: But there no VAT on fuel or fuel tax at all on aeroplanes.
Albert: Yeah it is environmentally the worst way I think to travel.
Sean: I love it
Moderator: Just go ahead, yeah Sean. Oh Claire
Claire: I think when you’ve got young families like when we never really went on holiday in England it was always like in Spain or we went to America a lot, I don’t know I didn’t really see a problem with it, I really enjoy flying actually I especially like take off and landing because it feels like you know like a big fast rollercoaster I really like it.  But yeah I never really go on holiday in England, I’ve been in the ferry and we’ve driven but I’ve never really I don’t know I’ve never really not flown abroad for a holiday.
Tom: I mean I’m not criticising people who do fly abroad its just when we’ve actually gone what we’ve done taken quite a lot of pleasure in working out your own itinerary and where we’re meant to drive and everything and booking the hotel as you go really..
Claire: Yeah we did that when we went to America yeah yeah.
Tom: ..so there’s not really been an incentive to you know to get on an aeroplane  which I think tends to go more to the sort of packaged sort of places that’s my image.  I mean I’ve flown for work and all sorts of things so I know I can do it, it just that having a large bottle of something helps.
Moderator: I see.  Simon holiday travel
Simon: I’m with Sean, I love flying I do it as much as I can.
Moderator: Why, can I ask why?
Simon: It’s just fun, you get nice places. I went to Morocco at Christmas I went to the south of France last summer I’m going to the south of France again yeah going to Lanzarote at Christmas.
Claire: It’s a good way of getting places that you wouldn’t be able to get to by car or by boat, you could go to America on a boat but you wouldn’t want to it’ll take too long.
Moderator: Some people would but they’re different.
Claire: It prolongs the excitement as well because when you actually land you like ah I’m here.
Simon: Yean no I love it.
Moderator: And so it a couple of times per year?
Simon: Yes
Tom: Could I ask you a question?
Moderator: Definitely
Tom: If you had to give up driving to save the fuel for the aeroplanes would you?  Because at some point that choice is going to come isn’t it?  At some point  you will have to stop driving to save fuel for the aeroplanes.
Simon: I don’t know I surf quite a lot so I go to these places to surf so its difficult, I mean surfing’s not that good in England.
Tom: It’s an easy decision for me I just clamp on the aeroplanes you know, but I understand sort of what happens and when does the crunch come? Do we all run around screaming or do we do something about it first?
Joe: I think its hard for a lot of people to sort of see, and I understand what you’re saying, but its like for a lot of other people its hard to see the sort of the things as they’re coming.  Because like Claire was saying going to Spain or whatever you can get there for and back for less than one hundred pounds and that’s as much as the train fare to Scotland is, and so it is ridiculously tempting for people who are throwing caution to the wind if you know what I mean.
Tom: It’s the choice coming that if you’re going to still use aeroplanes in fifty years you’d have catch the train or you’d have catch the bus to get o the airport or if we want to keep using the cars in the country the presumably you wouldn’t be able to go to Australia or America or anywhere that you have to use aeroplanes to get to.
Joe: Absolutely it is also like a situation which has been engineered I think by, I think it is about profits and the same with like reasons why stagecoach is the way that it is is because well they’ve got shareholders and they quite like making a lot of money off essentially disadvantaged people.
Tom: Well the guy who first privatised the busses in Exeter lives in your village doesn’t he?
Claire: Ottery, does he?
Tom: Harry Blundred, he was the guy who took over Devon General and put the minibuses back in, in the eighties I used to work for him.
Moderator: Ok thank you.
Tom: He owns a put there just in case want to go and do anything drastic.
Moderator: If you can the people who travel for holiday can you think if you are on the place you want to go do you travel differently there than at home, or do you use the same means of transport?
Claire: When me and Joe went to New York we got this metro pass which is like this pass for a week, but how much did it cost it was like twenty five dollars, but it was like one of those ones that you can get on any train any bus and the underground it was brilliant we got everywhere, and they’re so regular and its so convenient I’ mean I’d love it if that happened in England.
Moderator: So it’s different there for you
Claire: Yeah. Normally xxxxxxx 42:38 on holiday we don’t try to, we don’t like going anywhere by car or you know we try and walk or do something in an area where we don’t have to go out of area to do something fun if you know what I mean, we don’t have to get in the car.
Emily: Do you think they’re able to do that because of the population density?
Tom: Yeah
Emily: Because we’re quite spread here really aren’t we, because its quite a rural town its very difficult to run a system I think like that 
Claire: Definitely
Tom: Well that’s London. For weeks ago we went to Vienna on holiday and we did exactly what you said as we got there we got the passes for weeks and you know you can get on any tram any bus and it was absolutely brilliant but you’re right it population density and that’s presumably why London’s so good and why Edinburgh’s so good.
Joe: I’m, I personally would be quite interested to know on like these place are they all now run by independent companies or are they still sort of partly state owned?  Because I’ve got the feeling that in New York it was still a part of New York rather than anything else, but I just do know what a difference it makes in other places because I only know what it’s like here and like in…
Tom: Germany and Austria are state funded most of Britain isn’t xxxxxxxxxx 43:55 working on it when it went private and it is corporate profit motive geared up in this country, I can’t say anything about America I’ve never been there. You’re the expert on that.
Moderator: Thank you.  Just for a second coming back to your holiday travel, do you think did you holiday travel change in the last year.  Simon
Simon: No not really to be honest.  I started travelling when I was fifteen I went to Canada, that’s when I think I first went abroad was when I was fifteen I went to Canada and Menorca and since then I’ve probably gone abroad twice a year for the last five years. And I did an Africa in my gap year I went to Africa and got a plane down to Jo’berg and then from Kenya back up to England so no it hasn’t changed.
Moderator: Ok, anybody else notice some changes in his holiday travel or her?
Joe: When I was younger I use to go on holiday with my parents and they would pay and my mum loves travelling so we’d go once or twice a year and often, I mean we go on all sorts of holidays though because we’ve done driving in America which you obviously fly to but we’ve also driven around Europe several times and flown around Europe a lot, but since I got old enough to have to pay for myself I would say that I haven’t gone on holiday early so much because obviously I can’t afford it.  But I like the idea of now that I can drive going on sort of more driving type holidays anyway, I suppose partly because it’s a new thing for me personally and it’s the idea of sort of just like you were saying like looking around and sort of join together the dots of things you quite like the idea of it sort of been quite rewarding that way so I think I’m in a process of a change.
Moderator: Thank you Joe
Sandra: I think also for families when we were young we wouldn’t have been able to afford to go very far in this country without a car, because we had three children and train fares coach fares are quite expensive if you’ve got more than one child, you know maybe we could have just managed but I think in a lot of cases for young people I think a car is quite necessary.  My family have sometimes lived in areas where the schools were not easy to get to they didn’t have busses and it was really necessary to have a car to drive the children to school and to various activities and as I say for holidays they couldn’t have afforded to visit us coming on public transport its as simple as that really.  In a lot cases I think it can be necessary can’t it?
Sean: Yeah.  We wouldn’t have had the holidays we have had if we had to rely on public transport or transport abroad.  We used to the south of France a lot with a caravan we could have never afforded that with children, we used to go with my cousins and there was always four adults and about four or five children with us we couldn’t have afforded it but we went by car and towed a caravan and we some absolutely fantastic holidays.
Tom: It also gives you more options doesn’t it I mean I don’t think its so much the case today but I mean forty years ago I mean, I remember out first car you know and suddenly the horizons were endless.  It was like you were saying suddenly we could do all sorts of thing, things that hadn’t been possible before you know suddenly became real.
Sean: I’ve got a friend in Switzerland and we’ve been going there for thirty odd years now and they have a - if you go as a tourist they offer you a ticket and I think its about fifty between fifty and sixty pounds now for a fortnight you can go absolutely anywhere you know.  You just go on the train and their trains run to time we went to one place down in Locan down in southern Switzerland and we were five minutes late and the station master took us out to supper because the train was late, they run to the minute and you an pick up a train in – my wife went cycling in Switzerland and they got to Burn station the main station and its five stories of trains, and there was four ladies cycling and there was four guards waiting for them to take their bikes off the train go up with it on a lift the service is absolutely stunning and you can go up in cable cars busses whatever, as you were saying its much more integrated. 
Moderator: I think a question of convenience 
Sean: That’s right I think that’s what makes people use that sort of transport is it’s convenient.
Tom: Xxxx 49:18 we did overnight sleeper to Vienna and we stayed for three nights hotels and we’d recon we’d save I don’t know a couple of hundred quids worth of petrol, so it actually came out cheaper to do it on the train and what we were saying about xxxxxxx 49:29 tickets about going round there, I mean as soon as my daughter’s old enough we’ll probably do exactly the same again and we’ll go to Rome or somewhere like that it just ticks all the boxes.
Albert: The class element is interesting though isn’t it in England, because if you go into Europe or Canada everybody takes busses and its not so shaded with class or poverty you know, but in England the bus has always bee the real down and outs form of transport basically and the train has been respectable but the busses never have been but the one good thing about the bus pass now I think more people respectable middle class people are using the bus pass and so there’s a whole different range of people now on the busses, its just very recently I’ve noticed it.  People never used top take the bus but now its free middle class people they jump on the bus you know, I’ve noticed a difference anyway with the type of people.
Tom: The busses are better though aren’t they, remember it used to be the double deckers and they always used to smoke upstairs xxxxxx 50:30 and then it was those awful mini busses which were fine if you are four foot high and two foot wide, and now they’ve got these fairly nice single decker busses and you can be seen by the driver, you’re not worried about being attacked upstairs or being surrounded by fag smoke or being compressed into a very small area.  It just seems that the image of the bus had upgrade with the bus pass and the type of vehicles.
Albert: It is and it’s still a bit I mean that shoe bomber was on, I take the x38 the bomber that was in Exeter and that the bus I take all the time and I must say I haven’t been on that bus since.  But some appalling stuff happens on busses because there’s no bus conductors, a couple of drunks got on once when I was coming back and they were pissing on the floor and the bus driver didn’t do anything about it, these people they were so drunk they were harassing everybody.  It’s uncomfortable sometimes to take a bus because it does it is the lower class form of transport really.
Moderator: Thank you Albert.  I’ll now come back to one issue that as also mentioned before, the term sustainable travel is sometimes used do you know or what do you think this is.  Do you know the term maybe and can you explain it or what is it for you anybody?
Tom: Isn’t it something that go in the environment and its like regenerative breaking on trains for example where you actually save electricity when the train brakes.
Joe: Sort of, is this a kind of carbon neutral thing you are talking about?
Albert: The western lifestyle is just not sustainable lets face it you know, and transport is part of the instability of, you know you’ll never have a sustainable society while we are all dependent on so much transport.
Tom: My dad used to work in energy and he eventually all the energy is going to run out and all that will be left in nuclear power, and the developing countries will say ‘we need that’ and we’ll say ‘no its not safe you can’t have it’.
Moderator: Just to give you an explanation, sustainability in general is about, I mean the main thing is that its environmentally friendly but it also means you have to take into account social aspects and the long term perspective to let the world be and habitable also for forthcoming generations and that the main issue about sustainability.  So we can also refer to the environmentally friendly or more energy saving means of transport, what do think about these and especially about yourself, do you think you travel sustainable or in an environmentally friendly way and how do you feel about travelling this way if you want to explain that?
Simon: I think it’s beyond repair to be honest.
Emily: I think cost, the expense will actually teach people to you not abuse everything find other ways to get around or things that they just haven’t thought about or cared to do before.
Sean: I’d like to see a lead by the government, all MP’s walk to work all Mp’s go home on the bus on Friday night, lets have a lead form the top, you know they’re very clever at talking to us minions and saying we’ve got to this and we’ve got to save the planet but actually there’s more pollution in one rocket that is fired in Afghanistan than a million cars in Britain.  What my argument is, once the government start doing it if you’re a very low grade civil servant you can still have a car to go some place, why?
Albert: Government is about thirty years behind the public they always are.
Sean: Well yeah but what I’m saying s I’m waiting for that time when they catch up and I…
Albert: Well they’re not going to catch up we are way ahead of them, this discussion is way ahead of them.
Sean: I know, I’d agree with you whole heartedly.
Tom: The reason the government won’t do anything about it this, is that there come up to certain point where you tax people they’ve still got a choice to do things.  They wont ever force people not to use cars because its not a vote winner, you can guarantee that with a five year term of parliament if the government stops people using cars they wont get back into power.  So the only way you are ever going to get a government that stops people using cars and actually has sustainable transport is longer periods of government perhaps with proportional representation or something like that.  What will happen is that they will keep taxing it up in an effort to try and make people stop using it and it will depend on how selfish you are, you know the die hards with their Hummers or whatever will the last people driving on the road probably in about fifty years time do in one mile per gallon.
Claire: What if they brought in electric cars?  I mean because they did it in which state was it?
Joe: I think California
Tom: I think personally I am unhappy with the fact that we’ve got no car making industry in Britain and we’re all spending a lot of money putting money into car makers in other countries and I’d see us pioneer it, and we did it on the busses we pioneered with electric busses but there was just no incentive or interest from the councils or the governments to back it, and the actual amount needed to convert in a large way to electric busses was sufficient that it couldn’t be done by a private company because they weren’t going to get the return, because all the transport in this country is privatised these days they wont do, its got to be a major government incentive and that’s the point at which they have to tell people to stop using their cars which nis where we got back to really.
Albert: Sorry to be ideological but global capitalism is underpinned is the ideology that we’re all under at the moment, and while we’ve got, there’s now a few parties that are questioning capitalism because actually it’s the most primitive form of ideology, it doesn’t factor in natures economy or the social economy which is just as important as the market economy.  We’ve got the most ignorant system underpinning everything in the planet and its going to continue we are just going to destroy it and until we change the basic ideology basically.
Joe: That’s something catastrophic we are going that way anyway.
?: I’m all for revolution.
Moderator: Simon what do you think about stopping people using their car?
Simon: Like I said I think its beyond repair and until something happens I’m going to carry on enjoying myself and why not, there’s nothing I can do to stop this so I’m just going to fly and drive until, if busses were cheaper I would quite happily take the bus if I could save a lot of money and travel by public transport I would just so I could spend more money on beer and stuff.
Sean: I think we would all go down that line if it was cheaper to go by bus or train or whatever we would all say go.  We’d find the busses cramped then.
Claire: That’s what my parents find they wouldn’t want to use a bus because they enjoy the convenience their car so much and when I’ve talked to them about you know getting the bus to work or getting the park and ride to xxxxxx 58:28 they don’t, well they’d be quite happy to get the bus to Exeter but they wouldn’t know where to go from there because they don’t work in Exeter directly they work just outside of it, they don’t really take the time to look into what other routes they could take or whether you know its not really encouraged I don’t think, well it is encouraged but not enough to get sort of more adult and middle aged sort of people and to use public transport.  I mean its really drilled into the younger people but not into the people who are actually doing the most driving and commuting into Exeter.
Emily: Bus shelters I think that would be good to have some nice bus shelters.  In the winter it just really kills you, and I think if you had of sort of covered it a bit more.
Moderator: Ok, do you think you behave or do you practice sustainable travel yourself would you say that or.
Emily: Only that I walk as much as I can, is that sustainable travel?
Moderator: Kind of, I mean in my understanding it’s the most sustainable way to move from one place to the other just waling because I mean you use all that energy but that’s renewable if you eat the right things.
Emily: I also like horses as a way of transport.
Albert: We’ll have to return to that
Moderator: Sandra what do you think about the traffic, about sustainable travel in general?
Sandra: Well I don’t know that I can really add anything to that, I was thinking about my age and things it would be very popular but should people stop driving over a certain age .  It wouldn’t be popular because I know several people who are a lot older than me who still drive and I’m not sure it’s a good idea, but it would cut down a lot of…..
Tom: I’d like to ban people driving less than two miles.  That would be even more unpopular.
Sandra: Or second cars, I’ve got a family living opposite me who well the two sons have grown up, they’re a lovely family, but of course there are three cars there now where there used to be one. Its difficult you know isn’t it you can’t stop the young people having their cars 
Claire: They’ve got their own life haven’t they.
Sandra: Of course they have.
Claire: Very independent at an early age now and they’re off
Sandra: Well one of mines got a motor bike which upsets his mother but I mean my son had a motor bike so did my husband which is, is it marginally better I suppose for usage but as they grow up they do need the transport and it is difficult.
Albert: Well one thing when you stop driving a car when you do, I had to drive the other day to pick up some play stuff and to pick up some stuff, you feel so vulnerable and you realise what a dangerous pursuit this is you know. Going along and just with in four, you’ve got somebody else coming at sixty miles and hour the other direction it just needs a slight slip and you realise, it doesn’t take after about an hour you’ve forgotten, but actually the first hour when you get back in a car you think to yourself this is bloody dangerous, this is crazy what we’re doing.  And if you look there’s something like there’s one hospital ward in every hospital in England that’s just for car injuries, if statistically the government was to publish like the do five killings in Afghanistan if they were to put every morning like, I think it something like thirty a day people who get killed in road accidents and why is isn’t that headlines in the Daily Mail because the Daily Mail is supported by car manufacturers and they want to sell cars.  But actually cars is very is not safe you don’t feel safe in a car, I don’t anymore anyway.
Tom: That’s what they say about the trains, I mean do you remember Hatfield the crash and they shut the line for two weeks while health and safety went in and investigated it.  If every time someone was killed on the M6 you shut the M6 for two weeks while they measured it very carefully there would be a bloody outcry there really would, it’d be fun but…
Moderator: Sean what do you think?
Sean: Do mean that I live a sustainable life?
Moderator: Or just regarding your travels
Sean: Yeah I think I do because I do a lot for walking and cycling.  I thin but you’ve got to balance that out that’s why everyday life is either walking or biking then you know I go to Scotland long distance walking or I go onto Dartmore long distance walk and its this fortnight ago I went out and walked through one of the ranges and back and did about twelve and half miles and had a lovely day but when I got back I got into the car and drove home.  Its very difficult to, perhaps its just me I don’t know, it’s very difficult to judge whether that’s sustainable or not.
Tom: You said that didn’t you Joe, you drive to Dartmoor and go walking.
Joe: I do it quite a lot and, I honestly think it isn’t sustainable at all because we are driving there to walk around I mean if we walked there that would be fine but also that walking out mode of transport that’s not even a necessary mode anyway because we are just doing it for pleasure.
Sean: But then is that not balanced out by the fact that every day the car just stands in the garage and you walk or bike to work.
Joe: I wouldn’t say it was balanced because you are still using it, just because you walked around on Dartmoor doesn’t mean you didn’t drive there - it just means you weren’t driving around on Dartmoor for all that time.1:04:3
Albert: So Western lifestyle is totally unsustainable our lifestyle is completely, you go to Nepal and ninety nine percent of the people there don’t have cars they have nothing and they eat whatever they can find they have one set of clothes.  We are so indulgent our society it’s ridiculous, we’ll never sort it out. I’d like to think I’m sustainable but I’m not, I fly get the train I’m going on the bus all time that’s not sustainable, it’s sustainable within… No it’s not it’s not sustainable.
Moderator: It is maybe less unsustainable than other people…
Albert: Less yeah.
Moderator: Joe I would ask you what must change to make for you more attractive o travel more sustainable so to speak?
Joe: I love the idea of it so I’m already half there, it’s the fact that for me ot doesn’t work within Exeter I mean I don’t even drive round Exeter much anyway because its useless but so is the public transport. It sounds stupid but I honestly think its big businesses fault that that’s the way it is, it’s the reason we’re still using oil when there are alternatives and the way its going to carry on because they’re making more profits than ever and they like it.
Sean: Because most of our business today is shareholder driven and they’ve driven out private enterprise section where a boss would know his staff and would do things to help create the right environment for them and stuff like that.  All businesses now, and there isn’t any one business that isn’t shareholder driven to a certain extent and therefore the shareholders they get this amount this year next year they want more and the year after they want more than that, and what happens is you get further and further away from sustainability in that situation because you’re looking at what is going to make you the most profit to pay off these shareholders and its been like that for years.
Emily: I think it sounds like there’s just too many people.
Sean: But look what happened in China when the mountain fell, they’re all going to allow them to have more children now.
Tom: Actually its quite true, you go to France and there seems to be a lot less people on the road and there’s a lot less people per square mile.  I don’t think the public transport in France is much better mind you but it certainly is in Germany and Austria and Switzerland.
Moderator: Simon what are for you maybe barriers to behave more sustainable? Can you think of something that make it easier for you to travel more sustainable or more environmentally friendly?
Simon: Yeah price definitely price.  Free busses and I’d use them every day and I wouldn’t get in my car at all especially as a student, the train rout from Exeter to Southampton is absolutely awful I wouldn’t dream of doing that its just a joke and for the same price I can drive.  What else, I think that it really for me I don’t mind being cramped on a bus or anything like that that’s not an issue for me its all about money.
Moderator: Tom maybe some things
Tom: Work wise I don’t think I can improve it I mean I just use the train the bike and walking, I only ever use a car when I nick one off college because I need to carry something around.  If my wife wanted to stop using the car to get to work you’d have to make sure the nursery’s in Exeter opened at seven instead of seven thirty because she’d have to leave twenty minutes earlier, in an ideal world xxxx 1:08:55 she’d probably need a little shopping trolley to carry those books around but it would be entirely possible, shopping well you can get it delivered these days and if Sainsbury’s or Tesco’s wanted to go for electric shopping lorries then I’d probably plump for which one did that as a matter of environmental friendliness.  With a young daughter she likes to go to places like Bicton you know for a day out well you have to go in the car but if I wasn’t able to use the car then, if I was forced not to use the car then would start taking her to places closer that she might enjoy slightly less if we couldn’t get there or go on the train to places, but it would have to be that element of coercion and I’m enough of a fascist to say that I’m only going to be coerced if everybody is being coerced.
Moderator: Ok thanks a lot.  Let’s come to some measures related to transport.  What do you in person think about measures like let’s say road pricing or congestion charging have you heard about that? I guess so, Joe
Joe: Well they actually had a referendum when I was there and I actually voted in favour of it because Edinburgh is horribly congested especially in rush hours but people voted against it because people don’t want to have to pay more but I honestly think they would just pay I think that just by making things more and more expensive people will just carry on paying more and more, people I think just love it too much or have become so used to it they will just pay more and the fact that they don’t reflect that by making public transport significantly less means that people carry on driving because it s much more convenient and you can do it when you want.
Moderator: Ok anybody else?
Tom: I’m all in favour and if I were the government now and I wanted to make an impact gesture to show I was committed to sustainable transport I would ban any vehicle from the road that does less than lets say thirty to the gallon any private vehicle.
Simon: Where does that toll money go do you know?
Joe: In Edinburgh the toll money was supposed to go directly to funding the new tram system that was going to be built which is obviously good, I don’t know what they do in London though because as far as I know that’s the only place that has got it.
Tom: Didn’t they buy hundreds of new busses or something, red Ken bought loads of new busses and said that’s what it was from.  God knows what Boris will do probably use it to insult the Liverpudlians.
Moderator: I want you to think about the central and local government what do you think they can do to encourage people to change their travel habits so to say to change their travel behaviour?
Albert: Well they can be like the North American Indian and they can make every decision they make local government has got to be fro the seventh generation from now, so you don’t make decisions for this generation you go seven generations ahead and you decide what sane for the seventh generation ahead and that’s the sort of decision making we want in all governments, seven generations ahead then you start having some sanity then.
Tom: Practically locally government can do nothing though can it, without central government it can do nothing.  I can remember somebody said you can’t improve public transport without major amounts of money its essential.
Sean: That’s right but I think Devon’s had a good stab at it with this share a car scheme they seem to have done better than other counties.
Tom: I’ve been on that for four years and they haven’t found me a life share yet.
Sean: Haven’t they?  Well Barstall’s a long way out, its really mild up there.
Moderator: You mentioned car sharing schemes do you use it or do you just..
Sean: No I haven’t but I would if I lived outside Exeter I, I could find somebody to share with I would. I think it’s a very sensible idea.
Albert: It is.  You stand on the corner of Posel road and Mount Pleasant and you get nine cars with one person in them, its unbelievable I just sometimes sit there and just watch and its one person one person going into Exeter.  Well this petrol crisis had caused probably a step in the right direction really actually
Emily: A rethink.
Tom: My wife went out half an hour early this morning looking for petrol to get to work.
Albert: It’s interesting it really.  Like you were saying price is the thing that ultimately going to do the business.
Tom: Well it’s in the headlines though isn’t it one garage that charged somebody one pound ninety nine a litre or something like that and there’s outrage over it. 
Albert: He’s a crook that bloke he’s a complete mafia Exeter mafia.
Simon: Yeah that definitely makes a difference the price because I’ve definitely thought about walking a lot more since and just conserving because I had half a tank for ages and ages just conserving it because I didn’t think I could get any more.
Joe: It’s a very short term thing and if that price stayed at that level I suspect people more and more will just accept it and but it, and so its not going to in the long run make much of a difference anyway.
Simon: But if they put a larger proportion into the transport and not just into improving it, into reducing their prices if they made every litre was two pounds and seventy pence into reducing public transport prices then that would make  difference wouldn’t it?
Joe: I mean Richard Branson has done that with Trains in a way hasn’t he because he has decided that all the profits they make from Virgin Rail is going to go into renewable energy research, but I don’t know they made that announcement and we’ve heard nothing since.
Tom: Well that’s what I meant by regenerative breaking all their cross country trains they built or a good proportion of them have the power to regenerate the electricity back into the system and reduce consumption, the fact that then fortunately they all smell of toilets is presumably something to do with biofuels.
Moderator: Thank you. Have you ever heard about things like green travel plans or a green travel week maybe anybody of you are you aware of these things?
Claire: Is that where you are encouraged to cycle into work?
Moderator: Kind of
Claire: Like you see it coming off the A30 that big sign that says cycle.  I would cycle into college from Ottery but it’s a bit of a mission and I don’t think I’m fit enough so I think it’s the bus really, no apart from that I haven’t heard anything.
Moderator: You didn’t use that xxxxxxxxx :16:27
Sean: I think the thing is with green travel plans its again either district county or parliament making plans for other people that they don’t do themselves and people just laugh at it because its not for everybody it only for the select few.
Tom: We did one in Barnstable w had a green travel day everybody had to come in  the most green way possible I think it was about four years ago they did it and they never talked about it afterwards so I don’t think it was much of a success.
Moderator: That tell you something.
Joe: Exeter’s having a cycling Sunday or something at some point or might have had one. 
Tom: What you mean one where nobody works.
Joe: I think its just a morale boosting exercise for those people that do cycle but.
Moderator: Just one ore thing regarding sustainable travel do you think your personal holiday travel should be included in thinking about sustainable or more environmentally friendly travel and what would make maybe change your travel  behaviour? Emily
Emily: Probably holiday at home.
Moderator: Is this acceptable to you if somebody asked you to stay at home?
Emily: It is at the moment.  I’d probably go on boats and busses and planes ferries possibly.
Moderator: Sandra do you think its acceptable to ask people to travel less for their holiday or change their travel mode and that they reduce their number of flights or something like that?
Sandra: I don’t think people would like to be told not o travel so much, especially young people I mean its so exciting isn’t it to go abroad to go to different places and try different methods of travel, it was quite different when I was young you see.  Of course we live in such a lovely area here that I think we’ve always been happy in lean years to get a bus to Exmouth to get a train and walk out into the country we are very lucky here it’s a bit different to some people in some parts of the country.  I don’t know I think it’s very hard to try and tell people they mustn’t use the cars.
Albert: It’s a spiritual shift really that’s necessary, its not gong to happen the world is set up at the moment but once people realise that for instance its much more beautiful to watch a butterfly flying or a bird flying than it is to watch an aeroplane flying actually, its that spiritual thing and you think well actually why am I doing this why am I travelling so much and I’m eventually destroying all biodiversity all the species there’s no future for future generations, its like if you’re thinking about your kids I mean I wouldn’t have kids now, there’s no future for generations but that’s a spiritual crisis now, once people think am I gong to have kids because I’m bringing them into a world that’s unsustainable then, but until we have a paradigm shift start seeing the planet as sacred totally sacred anything that violates the sacredness of it you’re not going to get you’re not going to resolve this problem I’ sorry.
Sandra: Its very difficult now having brought up my children who are much more aware of the country side and things growing and the simple things, with my grandchildren its completely different its fine when they’re little but as soon as they get old enough to have their computers and their dvd’s and everything else you know its ‘grandma no I’ watching this you watch this with me grandma’ you know.  Its so different its changed the world has changed about one hundred percent I think from when my children were younger.
Emily: I think its role models isn’t it role models aren’t there are they?
Sandra: Yes, and it’s lovely when they’re little they will listen but as they get older and more materialistic and everybody’s got one and when my children were young it was ‘why haven’t I got a watch everybody in the class has got a watch’ and I said ‘well Peter hasn’t got one Peter hasn’t got a watch’ ‘oh no but everybody else has got one’ but now its not that it’s the trainers it’s the computers its everything its so materialistic and its not the children’s fault. 
Albert: And it’s the cult of the individual, it’s the Americanisation of culture.  We put the individual more important than the collective and that another, you’ll never solve this problem while the individual is most important, its all about individual, my aspirations all this government aspirational  crap but we’ve got to rediscover the collective and only when you rediscover the collective you will have a sustainable, it will become sustainable.
Tom: This escalated in the last thirty years didn’t it.  Discrimination is now not seen as your preference somebody else has got something therefore I want it and if I don’t get it you know life’s unfair I’m being discriminated against, this selfish generation has taken xxxx 1:22:18
Albert: Exactly its narcissistic.  We’ve all been so narcissistic in the last thirty years it just about me me, me and my aspirations it’s nothing to do with society and what’s good for the next ten generations.  Crap.
Sean: Do you think that this could be led from a university point of view?  You look at this university and you go round this campus and you see how many cars are parked on the streets of Exeter that belong to people who are on this campus thousands its not just a few its thousands, and I just wonder if you went out and said to all those students you can’t have a car there’d be rioting in the street because of this ‘me me me’ society.  I mean the university here builds all the building programme they’ve got going on has no paring with it but they still allow the students to bring cars so that is then put into the city and all the roads are clogged up with student cars.
Tom: My college wont stop students bringing cars because a) the students pay to be at the college and we as members of staff are paid by the college and b) they say that they’d rather actually know that the students cars are on site rather than pushing them out onto the streets surrounding it, so they don’t stop anybody bringing a car into college because they feel if they did stop them bringing them into college they’d be parking on the streets around and they’d have more of a public relations problem.
Albert: They’re very lucky they’re filling this campus in with buildings and doing away with the car park.  So you can’t bring a car you know it is impossible.
Tom: Well you know what park road’s like in terms of numbers of students.  The road that we live in there’s about three student cars to one house/home.
Albert: What I’m saying is if we started – I’m not saying this as a get at the students thing I’m saying this as an educational thing – if we started to say to children young enough ‘you can’t take a car to sixth form or to university’ would they then discover other means of transport which would carry on into their adult life, I don’t know the answer to that but that is something that I would offer as a thinking point.
Tom: It goes further though because my home town is Oxford and one of the reasons that actually stops us building an effective inner ring road in the city - which probably would have improved the transport - was because Oxford university wouldn’t let you drive a road across their meadows, and I suspect that if you wanted to put anything like an inner ring road round this side of Exeter it would have to come through this campus.  I don’t know whether that would improve the transport per say but what you say about it bring driven by the university and I suspect and forgive me if this is wrong but the profit motif xxxxxxx 1:25:23 to shareholders is probably just as true of the university management.
Albert: Its just an educational thought, educate people not to look at the car but to look at other forms of transport earlier in their life.
Tom: Does the university have busses and does it run regular routes to get to places which are known student areas of living like Mount Pleasant and Pennsylvania.
Claire: You’ve got the D bus that goes..
Tom: Stagecoach not university.
Moderator: Claire you wanted to add something before.
Claire: It was just to say that if I was at uni, or when I go to uni I will want to have  car because I intend to go quite a way from home and I’d want to be able to get in the car and come straight home if I have to or if I wanted to or if I wanted to go off on location and it was away from campus I wouldn’t want to carry all my equipment on the bus or the train I’d want to put it in the boot and take my crew with me, it would just be more convenient I think.  I mean when I went to  x x x in Ottery some of the students live in and around Ottery and they drove I felt that was ridiculous
Albert: Its not sustainable.
Claire: No its not.
Sean: But I would say to you if you’d been taught from a very much younger age to use public transport or whatever for of transport you would be saying to yourself now I’ll go university perhaps Ill hire a car to come home or I want to go out with a film crew we’ll have a minibus for a day.
Albert: This university had the best cricket wicket – I play a lot of cricket – Growl Lawn is just off as you go down the Topsham road is the most beautiful cricket ground all the students could get their own bikes, they sold out for five million pounds to Red Row to build all those posh developments, bought a cheap piece of land underneath a motorway the most inappropriate place to have a cricket field with all the sound, the umpires can’t even hear whatever its and because to make money.  You know the university did that in the most stupid, the university should be leading us in sustainability and that’s a prime example that’s completely unsustainable because all the students now drive their cars down to Topsham to play cricket whereas they could all just walk down Topsham road, and university is the worst example.
Moderator: We are running out of time, sorry to interrupt this really interesting discussion, but I just want to bring up one more thing, your sustainable behaviour or your environmentally friendly behaviour at home.  Can you think about things you do at home to behave more sustainable or more environmentally friendly?  Maybe Sandra?
Sandra: Well I try to be economical with my water and electricity and gas and that’s partly financial of course.  I do think about it from the other point of view as well but of course my family are terrible, they come and everything is on standby mobile phones are plugged in and things like that.  I was thinking about growing a few more vegetables but I haven’t got much room in my garden salad things you know.
Moderator: That is something, saving energy and water any thing else may be?
Claire: My parents try and grow their own vegetables and what the do they’ve got this ridiculous thing where we don’t have a dishwasher we use our own hot water but it takes a while for the hot water to come through so we fill up empty pint things of milk and when we flush the toilet we take the lid off the toilet and put the water in so we don’t pay for that.  They’ve now started to make sure all the plugs are turned off everywhere especially on the TV, with the whole light switches they don’t like lights being left on and they’re getting quite good with that, I thought it was ridiculous the whole saving water thing because when my friends came round it was like ‘when you flush the toilet you have to take the lid off and pour the things in’ and they were like, but I can see the benefits now.
Moderator: So it’s a little complicated
Claire: It’s not complicated at all I just thought it was a bit stupid.  But now I understand it and it’s good.
Sandra: I was just going to say I do keep a big jug by my sink because I’ve got a mixer tap and sometimes the cold water takes a bit to come through so I always pour what’s left in the kettle in there and I’ve got a water butt as well. The little things I think add up.
Tom: Its individual though isn’t it, do you feel that you are left to do it on your own and nobody actually supports.  I mean we asked South West Water for a hippo you know you put into the cistern and it expands and use less water and six months came by without getting one and a water meter and six moths came past without getting one, you know its as if you feel like doing anything like that you’re making a nuisance of yourself and I confess I’m probably the worlds worst person about leaving lights on.
Sandra: It is irritating to have to think about all these little things but..
Tom: You have to put post-its all around the house.
Moderator: So you would say you simply forget it.
Tom: Yeah.  I do try, whenever I think about it I try but I need to supported.
Moderator: So you think there’s maybe some need for environmentally friendly behaviour at home or is it just something brought up, do think it is necessary to behave environmentally friendly at home?
Joe: Of course it is.  I think it is a damn obvious question.  Hell yeah.
Sandra: Yes everyone has got to make an effort haven’t they as I tell my grandchildren.  They don’t mind what grandma says.
Tom: Anyone watch that totally stupid programme Wife Swap which is one of my wife’s favourites.  You do get the environmentally friendly households, but frequently when people are made to think about things it does bring an awareness to them but generally speaking I’m sure there are far many homes where people are thinking sod that I’ll leave the light on when I go upstairs.
Sandra: I do find they listen if you do tell them why this is the thing its not just don’ turn that on or turn that off you explain to the younger ones they do listen.
Emily: Plastic bags.  I’ve got Marks and Spencer’s ones and we take them to Sainsbury’s to pack up, they are actually giving you points now to encourage it so I think that good for them.
Moderator: So that encourages you?
Emily: I think no because I decided anyway but its just the habits you get into, because I remember my mother used to take a shopping bag everywhere  and of course for convenience they introduced plastic bag and now of course it’s polluting the planet.
Tom: Why can’t we do what the Americans do and have the sack you know the large paper sacks I’ve always quite admired that. 
Sandra: That’s alright if it doesn’t rain.
Albert: I think the most important thing is to stop shopping in supermarkets because the transport involved with a swede going from Devon up to Manchester to get packaged and coming back down, I think actually the most sustainable thing we can do is to not use supermarkets at all and just use the farmers market and corner shop, but it’s a drug supermarket is a drug everything is convenient but its very bad for the planet supermarkets.
Tom: But if they all delivered from online requests it would be much better.
Albert: You wouldn’t need all that packaging when you see the packaging that goes out as well,
Emily: There is a problem with that, it’s alright for people who are able bodied I think, there is a huge percentage out there that can’t do that unfortunately because if you get a sack of potatoes and a couple of tins it’s not easy to transport that’s the problem.
Tom: I think if you buy separately more people would drive more car journeys the way things are at the moment it would be a nice idea but it’s the balancing of the packaging against the number of trips you do in a car isn’t it.
Sean: And the other thing about packaging is that if people go to supermarkets and this again could be a class thing, if you go to a framers market its much more expensive and if your on as I have been thirty on pound a week unemployment and fifteen pound a week pension credit when they told me that I asked which Sainsbury’s they go to get their shopping you know this is for me and my wife, you can’t go to the farmers market it is far too expensive.
Albert: I agree.  But you’ve got to weigh up the benefits, English society are hooked on price and I know because I’m not… I know.. I understand that
Sean: I have twelve hundred and eighty pounds in nine months that was my pay.  Couldn’t go to the farmers market you can’t do it.
Albert: But you went on Flybe though for a holiday.
Sean: Yeah well I do that but that was only eighty pounds against two hundred and twenty pounds on the railway.
Moderator: Sorry to interrupt you.  Maybe you can continue later we are really running out of time and thank you everybody for being here today I have just one last thing for you to do if you could just fill out these forms for me we are still one pen short so I’ll give you mine.  And I’ll start coming round with the money.  Thank you very much and I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.
Albert: Very interesting actually, very interesting.