Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Good afternoon everybody.  Thank you very much for being here, your help is very much appreciated. My name is Moderator.  I am a researcher from Exeter University. And this meeting is part of our 2 year research project regarding travel behaviour.  We recorded randomly selected people from Crediton for this group meeting and asked them about their travel behaviour and their opinions regarding certain means of transport.  The first thing I wanted to ask you is just the first introduction round – where you can say maybe your name, what you are doing… whatever you want.  Your first name is Ok for me if you don’t want to say your full name.  Starting to my left maybe? 
Liz: Ok.  I’m Liz.  I’m 19.  I’m on a gap year and I am going to University in September.
Cheryl: We’re not actually….we’re from down the road in Newton [1.00].
Moderator: That’s OK.  
Cheryl: Oh its Ok, it doesn’t have to be a Crediton….?
Moderator: No it’s more the countryside and that it’s different from Exeter.
John: My name is John Jones. I live just around the corner across the park. I work for myself in Crediton [1.23]
Cheryl: My name is Cheryl.  Just completely coincidentally, I am Liz’s mother.   Live in Newton St [1.35] and I am self employed.
Gill: My name is Gill. I live in Crediton and I am a house wife.
Becky: My name is Becky I live in Crediton.  I am retired.
Tim: I am Tim. I am retired.
Moderator: Ok thank you very much.  The first thing I want to ask you is to just reconsider your travel behaviour and to fill out these small forms really. Don’t think too much about it.  It’s just….. if you can fill out your….. for the different travel purposes they’re…they’re….. normally used, preferred mode of transport and if you have an alternative. If you don’t have one just leave it out.  As I said don’t think too much about it.  Its just to get started with our topic
: [ALL WRITING]
Moderator: So my first question to you is simply which modes of transport do you usually use and especially are there major differences in the way you travel for different purposes.  Who wants to go first? 
Gill: Well I don’t have a car.  So if it’s in Crediton I’m walking. And if it’s further afield I am bussing unless I am going with somebody who does have a car.  And if I am travelling further than that, like to Bristol – I could go and see my daughter or Cornwall, then it’s a train. So preferred – I don’t really have a preference. I suppose it just depends where I am going you know?
Moderator: Ok thanks.  Tim?
Tim: Pretty much the same. I live in Crediton so walk to the shops or cycle to the shops.  We do have a car so longer distance trips we probably use the car probably more than anything else. Yes, that’s about it really.  I mean longer trips…I go quite considerable distance on cycle….as far as you can.
Moderator: Liz? Is it different for you or…?
Liz: Yes.  When I am at home I tend to use the car to go into Exeter or I get a bus because I use my parent cars, so if that’s not available I get the bus or sometimes get a lift with friends. But obviously when I am travelling further away it’s getting planes and trains.  Like if I am going to visit a friend who is somewhere else in the country it’s always getting a rain. But I don’t really have much of an opportunity to walk to places because I am sort of 5 miles either way to Exeter and Crediton.
: [new person enters the room]
James: Is this the [5.50] group?
Moderator: Yes.  Come in.
James: 5.30?  Is that right?
Moderator: 5.15.
James: Sorry.
Moderator: If you want something to drink……it’s James isn’t it?  Take a seat.  No problem.  Yes we just started with everybody’s used means of transport and their differences for different purposes.  John, you maybe have to travel for work a lot?  You said you are self working?
John: To actually go to work, where my office is I go by bike or walk. Because it’s in Crediton.  So if I can I will use a train when its possible to get to places, you know, sort of for instance, we’re doing some work in Totnes at the moment and its very easy and cheap to get by train and very pleasurable to get there.  But otherwise I use the car because it’s not always…… [6.57] to travel around the southwest or whatever. I don’t use buses really at all.
Moderator: Ok well let me add a question – what do you like about the way you travel, the means of transport you use and is there maybe something you don’t like?  You mentioned buses, trains and car.
John: I like going by train like I say if I can because it’s just relaxing.  And if you are not going to London it’s fairly cheap.  If you are going anywhere near London its costs an arm and a leg.  Yeah, I mean I prefer going by train rather than driving if I can.  I don’t know – buses, I’m just sort of not very keen on buses really.  But I mean the thing about trains like round here especially is the [7.50] line, the trains are fairly sort of infrequent so its quite hard to get the sort of right time you know, because sometimes there can be a 2 hour gap between the trains.  Buses are quite expensive as well really.
Liz: Very expensive yeah.
John: Very, very expensive.  Well Stage Coach are.
All: Yes.
John: Turners are much cheaper.
Becky: [8.21] I’ve got a bus pass! 
All: [laughing]
John: It’s a big thing around here about the price of buses.  Surveys have been done and I think its one of the most expensive… like getting into Exeter…. Per mile it’s crazy.
Cheryl: But if you are over 60 you travel free.
Moderator: Ok so let me add something.  You mentioned your bus pass Becky.  Did this change your travel behaviour maybe since you had this bus pass?
Becky: Yes. I wouldn’t go into Exeter with a car because it doesn’t cost me anything by bus and car you have to pay for parking and petrol.  
Tim: But you are absolutely right buses are extremely expensive.  I mean there are fairly regular but they are ludicrously expensive.
Becky: If you go with two people and you pay for it, for that money you can pay the car parking and the petrol and it’s still cheaper.
Tim: Yes there is no incentive to use public transport at all.
Cheryl: Well not Stagecoach anyway.
Tim: No, not Stagecoach. No.  I think even Turner’s you know if….
Becky: That’s a bit cheaper.
Tim: It is a little bit cheaper.
Gill: There are the ones that are subsidised by the council.  There’s a little bus that’s only a minibus that goes from Crediton to Tibberton.  It’s been taken over by Stagecoach but they still keep the price down because it’s a subsidised route, it goes to the villages on the way.  That’s quite cheap.  And Crediton town bus again is subsidised so if you …like I am up one end of the town and I want to go to Somerfield sometimes I will take that down.  That’s OK.
Moderator: Question for James.  When did your…travel mode, travel behaviour last change.  Do you remember that?  Was it during the last…?
James: Well the main thing is I only moved to Crediton in January. And before that I lived out on Dartmoor and I was …. And that was one of the reasons I moved, because I would have to drive, drive drive wherever I went.  Everywhere. So here now because I can walk to the shops and I have my bus pass. So I like Crediton because transportation is easy  but I have a bus pass. And inexpensive. There’s one little thing that I would like to add to some of the things that were said.  I think there are actually 4 buses the come back and forth between Crediton and Exeter. Two of them stop at the railroad station in Exeter and 2 do not.  But … and I have yet to use the rail when I needed to but for me I could easily take a free bus to Exeter and jump on the train so that the fact that not that many trains come here wouldn’t be such a huge problem. But what would be great would be if all four buses would stop at the train and then you’d have 15, 20 minute to the Exeter train station.
Gill: Its one an hour.
Liz: Because it’s the 50 and the Turners that don’t stop down there. And the 51, and the 315 do.
Gill: Yes.  I was going to say, I don’t know, when you try to get the Stagecoach – the one that goes to Barnstable, goes down there, I think that’s the 51…. And they are only hourly and they finish early…well they don’t finish, they have a gap.  Because I know I was waiting for it with a suitcase and it didn’t turn up!  And I had to walk up the hill which is very steep from St David’s up!  So they are not frequent enough those, I agree.
All talking: 
James: I don’t think it would….
???: Go to the station [12.28]
Gill : Into to town it is, yes.
Moderator: Thanks Becky.  James?
James: I don’t think it would take much them to change their routes so that each of those of buses stopped at the train as well or….
Gill: They used to years ago. They all went down there. 
James : But then often they will go and no one wants to go to the trains.
Liz: I found that quite a lot.  I used to get the bus the quite often when I was working earlier this year.  I was working in Exeter so I used tog et the bus back from town.  Sometimes I would be on the 51, it would be rush hour, and we’d be going down to the station and no would get on and no would get off.  And you think this is just a waste of an extra 20 minutes getting around there because it’s so busy.  So sometimes it’s not as good but…..
James: Well it would be worth examining.
Liz: Yes.
Cheryl: You can have the occasional scenario when a bus doesn’t turn up at all.  Because when you were getting the bus to school in Exeter [13.28] some morning the bus just wouldn’t turn up.  Even when you are working in the mornings, when they come… how often are they in the morning?  Every 20 minutes?
Liz: Well when I used to go to work I used to get one about 7.10.  Sometimes I would still be stood at the bus stop thinking I am late for work.  So that was a bit…. You’d think the Stagecoach…with the amount it costs, they’d keep it reliable.
Becky: Yes, it’s not much fun if you have an appointment because sometimes they don’t come and they come 3 together. They are not very punctual.
Gill: I think that’s always been so with English buses.
Moderator: Punctuality is a main point I think.
Tim: Well I mean to be fair to them Exeter is very, very…can get very grid locked at times can’t it?
Gill: But sometimes the buses down even leave because a driver hasn’t shown up.  I mean, if it’s broken down or anything you understand that.
Liz: But it was like when I was waiting for one at 7 in the morning, a bus coming from Crediton, they can’t really be that many cars on the roads, I didn’t hear of any accidents or anything, it was just that is was late, there was no reason given.
Moderator: Thank you.  Cheryl?  You use sometimes the car I think?
Cheryl: Car all the time.
Moderator: Ok.  Are there things you like about using the car or some things you don’t like?
Cheryl: It’s complete…well I feel guilty about the pollution of the car but I just have to….with the nature of my work, because I am self employed I can work anything between 80 and 60 hours a week and very flexible hours.  So you know I might need to pop into [15.11] 2 hours, I might need to come back later, I might need to have a passenger, I might need to go onto hospital.  It’s just absolutely impossible to do by bus, I couldn’t fit my working hours into the day because I am often hopping all over the place.  But… and its time.  Even leisure on a Saturday. If I want to go shopping, then I bring the car in because I have so little spare time that just the thought of….a 15 minute walk from where we live in the country to the bus stop. It’s a nice walk but you just think oh god, I’ve just got  to get this over with because then I’ve got to get home and do all the housework for the weekend.  So you know, its just the typical sort of stress to life and try to fit everything in.
Liz: Yes.  It’s quicker just to jump in the car and whiz out and then its 10 minutes into Exeter from where we lived.
Cheryl: Whereas if I never worked or did anything then I’d probably you know, I’d use a car once a week for shopping and I would walk every where else, and get a bus when I’ve got time, but life’s not like that you know, it’s just.  No.
Moderator: Let me add one question for you, Cheryl.  Do you think the way you travel, often or sometimes you use the car, it’s relatively seldom the bus, the way you travel, did it influence the place where you live?  The choice?  So you are from Newton St [16.42].  Did you choose to live there because you have a car or because there is easy access to a bus to Exeter or is the opposite way around?
Cheryl: Didn’t really think about it 30 years ago to be honest.
Moderator: So it’s more the opposite way that you have to use the car because you live there?
Cheryl: Yes.  I mean, I’ve always liked living in the countryside so sort of living in the countryside but you know you go back to the 70s and global warming, pollution everything wasn’t a major problem then. It wasn’t something that you thought well I had better live in a town because then I don’ have to use my car so much.  You didn’t think like that then. So I wouldn’t say I had any particular thoughts about my mode of transport when I moved there.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks. One other question for everybody.  Do you sometimes wish you could use other modes.  You mentioned something and …maybe somebody is concerned about the way he or she travels, and he sometimes thinks oh it would be good to use another mode of transport.  And if this is the case then why can’t you use them?  Or why don’t use them?
Cheryl: I’d like to sue a horse and carriage.
all: Oh yes. [laughing]
Cheryl: I seriously would.  But it would require the rest of world slowing down and using a horse and carriage.  I would like to go back where we are all going round in a little cart for 2 with a horse and you know it…you’ve got the horse at home, its safe and it’s fast.  But then you’ve got to have everybody else doing it as well.
John: Because I would like to drive a horse a carriage as well. I’ve never actually done it as a means of transport.
Cheryl: I’ve never driven one.  I’ve only… I ride a horse, but I’ve never driven a horse and cart.
John: Not as quick as jumping in the car though is it?
Cheryl: I suppose because I work with elderly people and their stories you know. You’re only going ack 100 years.  All around Devon and Exeter, all the farms had their own little cart and horse and went off to town on it.  It just made me think really, we’ve lost something there but there you go.
Tim: When I used to commute to work in Exeter.  I commuted from Exeter to Crediton I generally went by car.  But i do on occasions go on my bicycle but….
Cheryl: Brave!
Tim: But the trouble is… you arrive there, it takes about ¾ hour on your bike because it’s the other side of Exeter, and you know you are terribly sweaty when you get here. And then at the end of the day you’ve go the cycle back.  Its not so bad going, it coming back that’s the problem.
Gill: Yes, I would imagine the traffic is….
Tim: Well… and the other way to get there is go through the back lanes.  But that’s longer of course.  If there weren’t so many cars going along the main road it would be quite pleasant really.  
Cheryl: This main road is extremely dangerous.  A friend of mine was an experienced cyclists, was killed last year in our village on this main road.
Becky: I think much more people would use a bicycle if there would be cycling paths.
all: Yes.
John: There is plans afoot 
Becky: Yeah, there are plans.  Their plans for bypass for 30 years. [20.03]
Cheryl: But even walking.  You know if you want to get out n roads, lanes and so forth where there are no paths, these days that is dangerous. You get so much traffic on the roads, even on those narrow places that it puts you off really.
James: I was in India a few years back and they had a … I forget what they call them.  But it would be a small vehicle that would just keep rolling and it would hold about 4 or 5 people, going down the main street.
Gill: Tuk tuk.
Liz: Tuk tuk.   A little thing with 3 wheels, kind of like yellow and green coloured.
James: Well there were 3 wheeled. I don’t know whether these had 3 or 4 wheels in this particular case.  Because there are the 3 wheeled ones that are called motorised rickshaws.
Liz: Tuk tuks.
James: And those… one or two people would hire. But these were a little bit bigger and there were kind of like free floating taxis that would just go and down the main street.  You go out and you’d wait a few minutes and they’d be one.  And they always had….rarely would you find one that was totally empty. So at least on the routes they chose they seemed like a good efficient way to…. And you didn’t have to wait long. They’d be someone there…..
Becky: Yes.  And also especially in developing countries you have either these kind of things or little kind of VW buses or something or whatever [21.31] buses and they go up and down and all the time.
John: I think they are doing something like that in Totnes aren’t?  There’s a company started that like sort of use motorised ….
James: Really?  That’s been one of the things they’ve started? Yes. So it would be unscheduled but during this time period they would have maybe running up and downs ay between Copplestone and Exeter you’d have maybe 4 or 5 
Moderator: Thanks.  On that issue you mentioned being in India, the general question for you is how often do you go on holidays and what are your preferred destinations and how do you get there? Do you want to continue?  You mentioned being in India.
James: Yes, well of course fly because for a distance nothing else is practical. Generally have to go to Heathrow because no other place goes to the large international airports conveniently that…. Exeter airport is not practical for very many things at all and even Bristol.  And to get the competitive fares it needs to be….. and I usually take the bus from Exeter only because event o take the train you either have to go all the way into London and back out again or you have to switch to a bus in Reading anyway.  And just by taking the bus particularly coming back… just get on the bus and that’s it and I end up in Exeter.  Which, no I don’t like the bus that much but its better than hauling my luggage around and making changes. It’s alright, the buses here are quite a bit better than the buses in the States.
Moderator: OK.  Becky what did you mention?
Becky: Yeah. We travel a lot.  We now have discovered that it is quite convenient to go from Bristol to one of the major capitals…. Like going to Frankfurt or something and from there on a long haul flight.
Tim: Or Amsterdam.
Becky: Which is more convenient and you get the competitive fares and things, so we try to avoid Heathrow.  Because sometimes it takes us 6 hours when you are in a traffic jam or something happens.  But because we fly then, but when we are at our destination we will use public transport. So normally we don’t hire a care we try to use the buses and trains there and travel around.
James: So you say you fly to Frankfurt typically first and then to wherever your final destination?
Becky: Yeah. Amsterdam from Exeter or from Bristol with Lufthansa to Frankfurt. And then from there which there is no price difference than going from Heathrow or that way.  I just worked out a trip to Jo’burg and [24.57]
Moderator: John?  What about you?  Holiday travel?
John: Well I don’t really have that many holidays really.  I did go on a walking holiday in Cornwall and actually got the train.  Down to [25.10] walked along the coast and then got the train back up again. So that was [25.15] so that was quite nice and we worked out the connections and stuff so we didn’t need to use the car at all.
James: You even walked to the train didn’t you?
John: Yes just to the station in Crediton.  It was good.  Yeah otherwise of course if we are going any distance its flying.  But I’ve been looking into trains into Europe and stuff.  You know it’s amazing where you get to. You can go to Japan by train. It’s fantastic.  You get the Tran Siberian to Japan and then come back on the Silk Route through China.
Gill: You need enough time though.
John: Yeah and a lot of money actually.
Liz: Yes it’s very expensive.
Gill: Cost much more.
John: It’s a great idea though.  I was looking into going to Slovenia by train but it was quite expensive.  But if you got through somewhere like Munich or somewhere and change…… so yes there are possibilities to avoid flying. Which is good but I’ve not really tried them out yet.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks.  Gill?  You’re holiday travel and I want to add something. Do you think your holiday travel changed over the last lets say couple of years.
Gill: Bit more than a couple of years. I used to live in Spain for a number of years. So I was flying from Exeter to Palma and back a couple of times a year then.  But recently, past 8 or 10 years I’ve only been over once I think and I don’t like flying, I never have. It’s a means to an end for me.  So I’ve stuck in England since and my sister is Cornwall, my daughter is in Bristol and un less my daughter is taking me, because she has a car I go by train.  Bus into Exeter and catch a train.  So yes it’s changed.  But then again if I did have a car I am sure I would use it a lot as well.  I’ve got to be fair.
Moderator: Ok.  Liz?
Liz: Holiday travel?  Well I’ve been in France for the last 3 months – I only go back on Saturday. And to get there I had to fly to Marseille airport which was actually quite problematic because Exeter doesn’t fly to Marseille and Bristol doesn’t fly to Marseille until July, I don’t think.  They start the flights for the tourist season.  So I actually had to travel down to Newquay to get a flight from Newquay to Gatwick and then Gatwick to Marseille. W which is much easier than driving up to London.
Cheryl: Its much easier to do that for me, to drive you to Newquay in Cornwall, for you to fly to Gatwick rather than you going up to…… it’s 2 hours down to Newquay early morning, on a fly and she’s gone straight into Gatwick airport.  
Liz: It was more expensive to do that because it was a small plane going from Newquay to Gatwick with an internal flight, so that put the cost up a bit, but it was still more convenient. It wasn’t too much – it was £135 but that was one way, so it wasn’t too much but I know you could get it cheaper.  And when I was over in France I actually went over to Palma for a week and I flew there from Marseille airport. And then I flew back from Avignon and came into Exeter.  So either sides it’s always being picked up by people in cars and stuff.
Cheryl: [28.44] I mean I flew out a week ago to join Liz in Marseille but I didn’t have a chance to go anywhere to get a plane to Marseille because Exeter didn’t do them. Because I was working till midday Saturday, had to leave for the airport at 2 so I had to fly to Avignon and then got the train to Marseille because I just had time to pick up some knickers and a passport really!  So that again was convenience. It was sort of knowing that I would be working till the last moment.  And get my husband just to run me to the airport.  And leap on a plane.
Gill.: It’s very nice to be picked up whether you are going by train or plane or anything lese and not to have to faff around and with suit cases at the other end trying to ge public transport.
Cheryl: But over there the public, we used didn’t we?
Liz: Yeah. The public transport is quite good. Like the rains are very frequent and very good in France.  And you can book them over the internet.  Because for my mum I booked the tickets for her on the French website and sent them to the home address so she had them already before she left.  And I took a lot of public transport when I was in France. Travelling not very long, about 20 km into town. And it was 1.10 euro.  About 80p for a massively long journey really.  ½ hour in a bus.  I couldn’t believe it really.
Becky: You find it everywhere in Europe that compared to here very, very cheap……
Cheryl: Except taxis. So you don’t use taxis.
Liz: Taxis are awful.
Becky: …. And frequent and comfortable and on time.
Gill: I don’t understand why our Government – they don’t want us to use cars.  They want us to be environmentally friendly and yet public transport, even people who want to use it, they could make it so much easier and cheaper and people would, and then they would start leaving cars at home. So I think a lot of it goes back to them. I mean it’s only been the last 2 years they’ve had a bus pass for over 60s.  Well I think that’s wonderful. The number of people that’s helped.  It isn’t everybody that has cars.  
Tim: I mean it doesn’t help everybody. I mean if you think…..[31.01] there’s one bus a week and it’s not that useful.
Gill : i agree. But you only have to watch the bus stop after 9.30 in the morning and it’s all over 60s waiting, because that’s the first bus of the day they can take.
Tim: Actually if you look at the majority of buses they are more or less empty most of the time.
Becky: Because it’s so expensive.
Liz: So expensive.
Becky: But if the buses would cost £1 then much moor people would use the bus into Exeter because then it would be cheaper and it’s only a question of money.  People use their car because they go with 2 or 3 it’s much cheaper, but if it would be £1 they would say oh lets take the bus.
All agree: 
Gill: Well i can’t afford to travel in like I probably would.  So i think the government are hugely at fault on that.
Liz: Especially when I was in 6th form at school, so i was 17, 18 and i was getting the bus into school. So I bought a Gold Rider because my school wasn’t in the centre of Exeter it was up in Helletree so quite often you take a bus up to get there.  So I need Gold Ride which was £20 a week and they wouldn’t give me Student concession even though I was at school. I asked them for it and I showed them my … I had an NUS card and they said no that’s the wrong kind of NUS card. And I just kind of … each week…looked a bit shocked and paid the twenty quid.
Becky: But that’s a lot of money for student.
Liz: That is a lot of money.
Cheryl: For a school girl.
Becky : So the parents have to pay for it.  And for some parents it’s really a lot of money and they can’t afford it.  
Liz: And in the end I ended up sharing a lift with a friend who lives just out of Crediton so she drives through past where I live so we shared lifts which worked out well.
Cheryl: You went n the bus for a couple of years thought and it was very, very expensive.
Becky: And the buses, normally they are half empty or only people with bus passes.  So it would be cheaper if they were full and they would make more money then now with the occasional paying the full fare.
James: Yes, i am sorry I thought of another one, back to one of your earlier questions.  So, you can hear my Devonshire accent right? But when I lived in the States right near San Francisco and there were regular buses going into San Francisco and people were taking them and they were fairly reasonable but just around the corner, they had car pool lanes going into San Francisco where you could go through the toll booth for free and you could ride on a fast lane if you had three or more people in a car. So this scheme evolved with out anybody getting organised although there were people over here getting on the bus, there were people standing in a queue and people with their cars with just the driver would come along and stop, two people would get in, so they’d be three, and they never knew each other, they’d all just get in and they’d all head off to San Francisco.  And the next car would pull up, two more people would get in.  And it was all….
Gill: Bit like a taxi service.
James: It was a share a ride thing that was not organised.
Cheryl: But that’s an incentive to do it, because Devon County Council has notices up saying car share and everything else. And the amount of times when both my girls were at school, I would sit at the end of our country lane to wait for the bus, and as a pastime i would count the amount of cars in the morning when they were getting out the car sharing, and the amount that just had one person in. and it was one in seven had more than…generally one in seven cars had more than one person in. and that’s despite everything that Devon County Council say.  People still throughout in the sticks, it’s just the individual in their sometimes with a spouse or something.  People don’t car share because there is no incentive and that’s a really good…..
James: This was 20 years ago. And it wasn’t so much motivated bys having money, it was a little bit.  It was that they could just get straight in, they didn’t have to….. you know, the car pool lane, not even stopping at the toll booth just zooming on through, so the drivers had the incentive and the passengers had the incentive.
Cheryl: You’d need a flyover here wouldn’t you. A huge flyover [35.22]
Tim: But that’s a much better scheme than the Devon car sharing. Because that implies that you are going to carry the same person in and the same person back.  And when I was working I went in at the same time every morning but I didn’t come back at the same time in the evening.  So it was always different.
Cheryl: No the logistics of doing it area…. It falls apart.
James: And then the driver doesn’t go in and …..
Tim: Yeah yeah… the idea like you have, you know, you just stand there you pick someone up and you go.  Brilliant.
Cheryl: Brilliant idea.
James: This was 20 years ago so I am sure its happening more. But I know you’ve got to move on but….
Moderator: No, take your time.
James: …. But it would take organising in this case for it to happen. And then there is risk because you are getting into the car of a stranger and nobody is knowing.
John: Because nobody hitches anymore do they?  It used to be really common but that doesn’t happen [36.19]
James: Yeah hitch hiking is unfortunately not….
Liz: I mean you used to do it when you were younger.
Cheryl: I used to hitch hike all over Europe and on my own!
Liz: But I wouldn’t dream of doing it now.  Not only now. Not in any way.
Becky: Not the same anymore no.  It was never safe.
Cheryl: Well there was always a risk yes.  But …
James: I’ve hitch hiked a bit when I’ve been in this country and picked up hitch hikers.
Cheryl: I still pick them up in my car because I pay back all the free lifts I used to get.  But only people….
Becky: Depends what they look like!
Cheryl: Absolutely.
James: There ought to be a better hitch hiking scheme too.
Cheryl: I pick up girls or you know blokes if I recognise them as students or something.
Moderator: Thanks a lot. You brought up a few ideas. That brings me to another point on my list.  We sometimes use the term sustainable travel. What do you think is sustainable travel for you or what can you explain that sustainable could be?
James: Staying at home.
All: Walking
Moderator: Walking?
Cheryl: Or going on a horse.
Becky: Using bicycle.
Moderator: Cycling yes.
Tim: Horse probably
Moderator : Yes you mentioned the horse.
Cheryl: Then you get the manure for your garden as well you see!
Tim: And they cut the grass for you.
James: Beam me up Scotty.
Moderator: You are absolutely right.  That’s pretty much related to environmentally friendly modes of transport.  So that’s walking, using the horse or public transport.  Do you think you for yourself travel sustainable?  Or maybe not that much sustainable?
Gill: What?  The way we travel at the moment?
Moderator: Yes.  You first maybe if you want to tell us?
Gill: I was just going to say for me yes because I’m all walking and public transport so yeah.  Providing the prices don’t go up to much
Liz: But I think generally its really not…. When you think how many people just…. On this route you see how many cars there are, there are just so many cars and its lots of people just by themselves.  Not really thinking about what they are doing, just driving by themselves.
Gill: I do hate that as well.  I mean I don’t have a car but I don’t like the fact that there is so much traffic now.  And the pollution that you are getting walking down through the high street and the speed.  Oh and those boy drivers with the big exhaust pipes.  The noise!  Oh.
Becky: Don’t mention those.  I think everyone nearly killed by one of those.
Gill: So I prefer…. Oh things... more tranquil, more leisurely.
Cheryl: I think having a car is not as sustainable as…. How many million cars are there is in this country now?  It’s gone up millions.  
John: And the oil will run out.  It’s not…it’s just a matter of when
Becky: Nearly everybody over 18 has a car.
Cheryl: Because it will be impossible to drive on roads because they will be gridlocked out of the centre of where you want to go to such an extent that it actually will be quicker to walk [39.38] because we produce more and more cars and this government is always…. Does road widening schemes and all its showing with road widening schemes in this country and i think the M25 is a classic example – one of the worst motorways in the country – you know you’ve got four lanes there instead of three.  But all that does, the wider you make a road, all it does is swallow up more traffic, it doesn’t ease traffic, just more traffic comes in, and it gets gridlocked in the same way.  So theoretically you could cover the whole of the British isles with roads and not have a field left. And the supply of cars would just increase until the whole island was gridlocked.  It’s not sustainable, it’s a small island.
Becky: But the one problem is probably the public transport, that the trains are so slow, unreliable. And that depends where you go, very expensive and it takes us so much more.  We are going in two weeks to Germany and we have booked all our train journeys on the internet and for most distances it is about 2 hours shorter to go by train than it would be by car.  And it’s very cheap, if you book in advance, much faster and more convenient.  Because you are in the centre of the city, you don’t have to look around for car park, easy for people to pick you up there and it’s….
Tim: One of the bizarre things in this country is that people are…. They use the price mechanism to discourage people from using trains.  Because there is simply not enough rolling stock and the tracks are such in lousy condition that they can’t take much more.  So in fact, the train system has been dogged by years of underinvestment, dating back probably to about Victorian times, really!
John: It is getting more and more popular isn’t it? I think the numbers that are travelling by train are going up
Tim: I think it would go up hugely if there were enough trains and…..people would travel by train, they would.  People want to. It’s just very very difficult.
Liz: I’ve heard a lot of people saying that living in Newton St Sires where I live, to go into Exeter would be brilliant to get a train.  Because i mean the station is a bit of way to go but it’s a nice walk to go from anywhere in the village to the train station.  But the trains stop at 8 at night and that’s it.  Otherwise you have to kind of request it stop or something.  But the train would be convenient to go into Exeter.  I wouldn’t mind at all.
Tim: Well it goes right into the heart of Exeter doesn’t it?
Liz: Yes.  And for me it’s another 10 or 15 minutes from where I get the bus from. It’s not much different.  Its 15 minutes walking and it’s a nice walk.  Yes it’s a shame about the trains.
Moderator: So there is no train or…?
Liz: There are trains that go through but they don’t stop.
Moderator: In Newton?
Liz: No.
Becky: They only go every two hours or something.
Cheryl: They stop in Crediton.
Liz: Yes, I think there’s a couple that stop in the evening but that’s it.
Gill: But they aren’t very frequent are they in Crediton?
Becky: No I think its every two hours or something.
Gill: And I must say I never go into Exeter via train because I live right up the other end of town.  It would take me more than half and hour I should think to get down there and to get back.  So it’s much much simpler to bus for me.
Moderator: You have already mentioned a lot of things – the government or measures that can be done.  I’d like you to sum up, what would be necessary to attract you in person to change your travel behaviour to more sustainability?  I think you mentioned improving public transport, prices all those things.
Liz: I think it’s the prices of buses.
Cheryl: Nationalising the railways again.  Privatising them and all the money being paid the shareholders instead of going into the infrastructure of transport.  It’s a fat cat world and that’s what it’s all about.  Systems are shambolic and….
Becky: And same with the buses.  
Cheryl: Yes exactly.
Becky: Stagecoach make enormous money and it should be really nationalised and a non-profit making scheme.
Tim: I mean you’ve got this ridiculous situation of Crediton in that you’ve got…what did we say 4 buses going in from Crediton and you’ve got a railway.  Well the most sensible thing to do to go into somewhere crowded like Exeter is for buses to be delivering people to the Crediton station or Newton st Sires station and then going in on the train, which would avoid all traffic jams.  But its…as you two said its lack of a concerted plan.
John: Yeah the integration
Tim: No, there is no integration.  Yes.
Becky: It would be one ticket and we could use it as one ticket for buses and trains so that you could book your train from up where you live into Exeter using bus, train whatever and it would cost….. Yeah lets say £1.50 or something, it would work.  And the other thing is all other countries you can take a bicycle on the train.  Here you have to book it up 3 weeks in advance or something.  So if you could take your bicycle, go on the train, go into Exeter…. And then…
Cheryl: These are like obstacles that they deliberately put in your way isn’t it?
Becky: … wherever you work in Exeter because not everybody works around the station could then go with their bicycle to their place where they work.
Tim: Well they’ve got rid of all the guards vans which was where you used to put your bikes when you travelled on the railways.  They’ve gone, so there’s not where to put them. I think there’s about 4 places for bikes on trains.
Becky: And you have to book them.  And you don’t know if you want to go. It would be nice for leisure. You go with the train somewhere, take a bicycle then you do a bicycle ride.  Now you go by car there and then it would be… lots of people do it because you could do then a thing from A to B and you don’t have to go back. So people would do it and use it.  But it’s impossible.
Cheryl: So people end up using their cars even for leisure because they just can’t bear the hassle of unreliability, endless changing.
Becky: We like cycling and we would go with the train somewhere, if you could take your bicycle.  Cyl; ce somewhere and from there take the train back.
Tim: It’s amazing the difference which an integrated approach can make. We were in Wales a couple of years. And there is much more money going into the transport system in Wales.  And if you wanted to do a coastal walk, there are coastal walk buses.  So you can go from A to B, you come to car park you pick up the bus , you go back to where you’ve come from or onto where you want to go to.  You know that’s a bit of forethought.  And it’s putting a bit of money into it.  And the buses were cheap as well.
Becky: Here we did a walk in Cornwall and if you want to go by bus sometimes it takes you three hours because you have to go by bus into whatever…. To Truro, then down again, so you have to make a huge journey to go by bus at least 50km you are walked.  And that was really great in Wales because it was from the car parks and just along.  It was only for walkers and the bus was going very frequently and so you could really do niece walks using the buses.  Going a long and walking back the other way.
Moderator: Thank you.
Cheryl: I think there is another thing against taking a train.  If you actually want to go further afield, say if you were going up to the Midlands or North or London or something rather than a short journey… I just feel I am not going to be ripped off by them because first of all, ok if you book well in advance that’s fine, but even if you do that there’s no guarantee you’ We got the best price because we have the most bizarre pricing system.  And its actually cheaper…. But this all takes time, you sit on the internet, for example when Liz went to Bournemouth along the cost.  Ok its only 100 miles away, to see a student friend there last year and she went on the net to book a return trip to Bournemouth on the train.  And I said no break it down into smaller trips.  Try Exeter to Dorchester, Dorchester is halfway to Bournemouth and then try Dorchester to Bournemouth.  And we saved £14.  so its knowing that if you actually break a long journey into lots of single trips you could end up paying a tiny fraction of the price and… I mean the Guardian Newspaper, the Guardian Money talked about this last year and said always do this.  But you need time and effort and then at the end of the day you think well why the bloody hell…..?
Becky: [49.15] sometimes it cheaper to go from Crediton somewhere than from Exeter.  
Cheryl: In the end you think well I’m sick doing all this, if they are going to rip me off unless I break it down into single journeys, well of course I am just going to get in my car and go aren’t I?  Because prices are so unfair, so unreasonable and they are completely irrational, the train rules are I think.  Completely irrational
John: They are supposed to be changing the system aren’t they? [49.44]
Cheryl: Well I know it’s recognised.  It doesn’t…. it just makes you think, if he wants to get to Doncaster or Manchester and you think Oh God, turn it into four single journeys or three parts, wait an hour in between each one.  Just get in the car and go and you know that you are doing something that’s polluting and bad but the system is such that you just want to scream.
Moderator: Thank you. Interesting.  I already asked you about potential measures to make it more attractive for you to use sustainable means of transport so to say.  I just want to mention two things and ask you about your opinion of these.  What do you think about route charging or congestion charging?  There are some approaches including these things. What do you think about that in general?
James: Road charging or congestion?  Like toll roads?
Moderator: Something like that yeah.
Liz: Like charges for going in the centre of towns?
Moderator: Yes.  What do you think?
Becky: It will reduce traffic but it will hit  those who have to u the car because they work there and they work all hours or people like you and people who really need their car to work there and they are not normally the people who earn the most money and they will be hit by it and….
Tim: Well it doesn’t hurt the rich at all doesn’t it?  It’s fine.  I mean it’s the same with the London congestion charge.  The fat cats still can travel.  Only ordinary people that can’t. its like in the 19th century, you know, the Duke of Wellington objected to railways because the poor would move around and so you know, its pretty much the same sort of thing really isn’t it.
John: But there are plans aren’t there to perhaps bring charges in for like gas guzzling, 4 wheel drives. Masseratis and Lamborghinis….
Liz: That’s a good idea.
John: … and let the cheaper cars….. well actually like the London congestion charge [51.54] certain categories aren’t there of cars that [52.03]
Tim: I think they have found with most congestion charging that it works for while and then it doesn’t.  And people go back and say oh well you know I’ll pay the fine but you know.  People are prepared to make very big sacrifices to use their cars.
John: Yeah.  Talking about the price of petrol, obviously shot up recently.  But whether that….
Becky: It doesn’t make that much difference.
John: It will make a little bit of difference, but people will perhaps give up other things before they give up their cars.
Becky: It makes [52.29] think ok I’ll do that, but then they get used to the price and then they go back using their car.
Liz: But the thing with congestion charges it would never work here because in London you’ve got efficient public transport system, you’ve got the metro.  I mean I know you have…. But there’s still… you can get around the city much easier than you can in Exeter. In Exeter the internal buses – there are some but you know it’s not as easy to get around as it would be in a bigger city.  So I don’t think congestion charges here would work so well because people would be discouraged from leaving their car outside the city because they’d be thinking they would have to walk all the way around Exeter.
Becky: We pay with our tax already road charges.  Every mile we go we pay for the roads.
Cheryl: I think its fair dos to tax the big gas guzzlers.  You know, the 4x4s. You know the classic joke – is like you know mothers running their children to school.  They come into the playground corner, they come…… your school?
Liz: Yes I saw it a lot at my school.
Cheryl: I’ve got a little Golf and all my friends, all her friends parents…. Say good morning to them up there in their 4x4s.  If I ever drove you in, they are all coming in in great big things.
Liz: And they are all for show.
Tim: St Margaret’s was this?
Liz: Yes.
Cheryl: Did you have a 4x4 that you drove to St Margaret’s then?
Tim: I didn’t have a 4x4.  I was teaching just across the road, coming in on  my bike.
Moderator: Ok.  James?
James: I think one problem with congestion charges is to set up such a system that has quite a bit of overhead.  You know you have just hiring the people, the computer systems.  A good friend of mine who was the project manager for the London congestion charges system and he coordinated everything including increasing the public transport and channelling the money and where you can purchase and the cameras and this and that.  He was responsible for the whole thing, subcontracting to various contractors.  But just imagine the amount of money to set up and maintain that sort of system.  Of every pound people pay for their congestion charge, a sizeable portion has to go into maintaining the congestion system.  So I think i would only work well in a fairly large city.  But I think it has worked well.  I am a little surprised even if people go back to continuing to use their vehicles, they are still getting that revenue that they can channel into. …. That they claim there channelling into public  transport.  So I am not… I am sort of in favour of it except if I think of it in terms of Exeter it seems hard where they are going to get the funding or whether that funding would be worthwhile to set up that whole elaborate system of where you go when you purchase it, ho you purchase it, and then it would be better to provide some kind of more incentive things that we’ve discussed earlier.
Becky: Well it would be cheaper to have buses from….
Tim: Well that’s another thing isn’t it?  If you got o Exeter and you use the park and ride, then very often to use a park and ride it’s more expensive then going and parking in the centre of town.  Because park and rides….. So if you’ve got four people in the car, it cost about £1 each, so £4 .
James: To take the ride into town?
Tim: I mean why isn’t it free? It’s ridiculous.
Moderator: Ok.  Thank you.  I just want to mention something and you can tell me if you have heard about that.  We already brought up these car sharing schemes.  I don’t know who mentioned it.  Was it you saying it wouldn’t work you?
Tim: It wouldn’t have worked for me because I was going into town the same time every morning but I was coming back at like…. But I mean in other jobs I have, I have car shared because you do tend to finish about the same time and you live in the same place it would have been difficult to have done.
Moderator: Ws it something introduced by your employer or by local government or …?
Tim: No we just did it.  
Moderator: Just on your own?
Tim: There were about 3 of us who lived in the same town and went to another town to work so it was easy to car share.
Moderator: Have you ever heard about things like green travel plans or green travel week maybe?
Gill: I haven’t heard about that.
James: No what is it?
Moderator: No?  It’s ok.  Me neither.  Do you know Travel Smart.  That’s also a scheme.  Its more Exeter based.  I don’t know if it’s well known here.  These are some measures from the local government to encourage people to change their travel habits.  But if you haven’t heard about that.
Liz: No all we ever see is that sign coming after Cowley Bridge after the roundabout.  That sign up saying car share. That’s the only thing I’ve ever really seen.  Just a few signs around saying car share, save devon or something.  But that’s all I’ve ever seen.
Moderator: Thanks.  That brings me to my last point on this section – do you think holiday travel should be included in these measures towards more sustainable travel.  Would it be possible to force people to change their holiday travel?  Maybe travel less or to different destinations or change their mode of travel.
Gill: Yes.  Put up the air fares.  Because everything has become so cheap now.  So instead of going away once a year, people are going away 2, 3, 4 times.
Liz: Yes, all these cheap deals.
Tim: The prices are going up now aren’t they?  And they will group more.
Gill: But still…I mean I am going back 25 odd years ago, it used to cost me more then to go to Spain, then it would now.
Cheryl: They are going up because of the price of oil.  They are not going up as a disincentive to fly are they?
Gill:  No.  But that is a lot of it.
Cheryl: [58.47] tell people not to fly.
Tim: Well the holy thing you would need to do would be to tax air craft fuel as you tax other fuels.
Moderator: But do you think this would be accepted and would people really change their holiday travel behavior?
Cheryl: No.  People would resent it. Because a lot of people already see us as living in a nanny state where there are many constraints in place on us. 
Gill: I think the fuel prices keep going up the way they are, is bound to hit people eventually.
Cheryl: Oh yeah.  I mean money wise it will hit people, but I don’t think are going to be told you can’t go there or …
Becky: No but if it was too expensive, if the flying is too expensive they just won’t fly. Because lots of people fly now, they wouldn’t think of going on holidays by plane but now going for 20 quid somewhere, costs you more going to London or anywhere says it all.
Cheryl: You can get flights for a quid can’t you?
Becky: Somewhere and but if it would cost £300 they wouldn’t go.  They wouldn’t go for a weekend somewhere like that.  There are all these weekends and stag nights and hen nights, outings, and they are just going for a weekend because…
Gill: It’s cheaper than going somewhere in England.
Becky: ……you only spend £20 to fly there.
Cheryl: No I agree with you that the only way to stop people is to put the price up.
Moderator: James?
James: If you stop and think about just all the measure we thought about, about what would cause us to do something…. One way is penalise us with price or some other problem for doing it the bad way.  And the other is to regard us for doing it the good way.  So on this one, I started thinking well, I don’t know if you could generalise in an area of maybe people take two vacations year…what would work to get them to where they go. Over seas or to a foreign country on one, but it would be like if they were more energy put into creating really fantastic family holidays that are more local, and publicity goes into that, certainly you have that from the perspective of the economy of the local towns and all that, but for the transport industry also to get investment into making those holidays special and in the publicity of them, so that people would ay yeah instead of going to Portugal twice lets go to Portugal once and go to the xyz, fair, conference…..
Tim: But the trouble is going to Portugal would probably be cheaper than going to Cornwall.
Becky: They can’t afford a holiday in England, it’s too expensive.  That’s why they go to Spain.
Cheryl: For years people have gone aborad to get hot weather in the summer.  But now that’s not so much an issue.  And I don’t actually think that there’s poor….. holidays need to be made better in this country because …. I suppose it depends what you want but you know we’ve done loads of family holiday in this country, Wales and Cornwall.  But then you know if you love coasts and walking and that kind of thing you can find idyllic holydays.  But is true they are ruined if it pours with rain all day.  And that’s why [62.17] people don’t wan to pay for a holiday cottage for a week just to be rained out.
Becky: No it’s the prices.  
Gill: Yes both.
Becky: If you are paying 60 or 80 quid for a bed and breakfast, and if you go out in the evening for a meal and that cost you another 50 quid or something, for that money you can have a lovely time somewhere aboard for half the price of accommodation and food so you can go instead of one week, two weeks.  I would say we would do much more holidays in this country, but to honest I can’t afford it.  I’d rather go somewhere in other European countries because it is much cheaper there.  They get better value, I get better accommodation for less money.
Moderator: So again it’s a question of price.
James: Well I only know of one friend and you’ll probably laugh because …. But he likes taking his family to Butlins.  And that there is something for everyone and he also find it reasonable. Now if that…. If whatever he finds for that kind of ….. could somehow be done for other groups.  You know, I could think of [63.9] St Mary once a year they run around with flaming barrels over their head or something like that, and if somehow that was made into  regional fare or…. And to make them…but it would take coordination between the tourism and the transportation and to make it affordable it would take a lot of….
Gill: Oh and health and safety in this county.  They’d soon shut it down.
Liz: Yes.  They’ve already tried to close [63.54] so many times.
James: Well, I think that’s only because I don’t know other things, but there are other issues there that make communities special.
Tim: The problem with that is you will conflicts won’t you?  You will get the conflict between the people who want to go coastal walking or walking on Dartmoor because it’s quiet. And people who are organising holidays of a more exciting kind so you are going to get a conflict here.
James: Yes.  And there’s the conflict of the people that don’t want tourists coming here.
Moderator: Yes that’s right.  
John: Or in the case of Crediton there is nowhere for anyone to stay if they wanted to come.
Tim: There are bed and breakfasts.
John: There’s one yeah.
Moderator: Thank you very much. Last topic.  We’re pretty much sticking to the schedule its great.  Slight change of topic. I want to ask you to think about sustainable behaviour at home or environmentally friendly behaviour at home.  What do you think of behaving environmental friendly at home?  What can you do at home to behave more environmentally friendly?
Gill: Are we still talking about transport here or….?
Moderator: No, no.  Domestic behaviour.  At your house.  You mentioned recycling?
Liz: Recycling.  So that’s with the council.  Sorting it out, put it out and it gets collected.  
Cheryl: Well we live a bit of an opted out lifestyle anyway don’t we so.  
Moderator: What else?
Cheryl: Vegetable garden.  My husband does a vegetable garden and just the other day he was saying he’s got to double the size of it, and virtually it is all food.  But because we have hens and dogs and rabbits and things….
Liz: Nothing gets wasted.
Cheryl : no food gets wasted.  The only food that is every wasted is if we can’t finish a curry we’ve made and….
Liz: No animal wants to eat it.
Cheryl: The dogs would eat the curry but I don’t give it to them.  But absolutely everything else.  Peelings, we have potatoes, the potato peelings are boiled and go to the hens, so we….
Liz: And then the other food is put in the compost and Dad turns it over.  He’s been doing it for years and he uses it for the garden and again to grow  vegetables.
Cheryl: And all the animal manure goes onto the vegetables but…..
Gill: Mid Devon Council is really very good for recycling. They could still more but we do get a lot of things recycled now.  I mean I still hate throwing away anything. Any of these you buy sometimes from the super market, your meat and they come in these trays, and your fruit in a little punnet.
Cheryl: I don’t buy things that are in plastic containers
Gill: I don’t like throwing those away but they don’t actually recycle them yet which i wish they would.
Becky: No we don’t have any plastic recycling apart from milk bottles.
Gill: Milk bottles that’s all yes.
Cheryl: But we are still too complacent about buying stuff that is wrapped in this when we don’t need to.  Like 4 apples in a square punnet with cellophane.
Liz: There’s no need for that.
Becky: And the same is with plastic, there are now these schemes that the Crediton shops encourage you to use….
Gill: Now I do that all the time.  I carry a plastic bag around with me in my bag.
Becky: But on the market they always offer you….. they put it in a plastic bag. No i don’t want a plastic bag, I have my own bag.  Oh, put it out so….. so they don’t encourage you. They encourage you to use the plastic bag because they give it you already in the plastic bag.  And that is farmers market.  And you still see lots of people with their plastic bags and especially Tesco and Somerfield.
Gill: You’d see me with mine but it’s only because I keep recycling it.
Becky: Our bags …we take are 20 year old.  And shop with them.
Moderator: Thanks.  John?
John: Yes.  There is a big movement in Crediton to become carrier bag free and if it happens which is quite likely it will be the biggest place in the country.  
Becky: But you won’t get Somerfield to change their….
Tim: Or Costcutter.
John: Yeah.  But the Chamber of commerce is all behind it.  They are really…. The local shops.  It’s only the big nationals.
Becky: I’ve done all the scheme 20 years ago in Germany and was in the initiative and we got …. In a short time we got out town plastic bag free.  You only get it if you charge for the plastic bag.  If the shop charge 20p for plastic bag and for£1 you can buy a cotton bag.  And you think oh that’s better I can use that several times. So as long as they are free….
Tim: Steve B the Baker is doing that.  They charge for a plastic bag if you want one.  And they are bio degradable plastic bags as well.
Becky: Yes but that is the only place.  All the others you get plastic bags. And as long as you get them people take them.
John: Yeah but I think it is changing pretty quickly actually.
Becky: And you can get people…. Its very easy just charge 20p for it and people won’t take the plastic bag.
Moderator: So we have recycling, less using plaice bags.  Anything else?
Tim: Trying to remember to turn off the electricity and standby.
Gill: Packaging.
Moderator: Packaging?  Energy saving you say Tim?
Becky: The standby is so much… I just read it somewhere – if everybody….
Gill: Televisions do you mean?
Tim: Televisions or hi fis….
Becky: It would be about as much as a city like London uses in a year or something.  It’s enormous.
Gill: I wish our energy providers would provide us with a detailed list each item that we use in our homes – how many units they use for how many hours.  I don’t know what everything costs and I wish i did.  I am already very careful with my electric, partly for the environment and partly for the money. 
John: This group that I am involved with we've actually just bought some meters that are going to be on loan, that you can actually plug in and you can see what [70.00] actually going to use.  We’ve got a grant to buy all these special meters.
Gill: Oh excellent
John: So you actually can.  And you can do it even by money or sort of units, so you can see immediately how much things are costing.
Becky: We have just….. we [7013] now we have new windows and a new roof so we our house quite energy efficient.
Moderator: Great.  James.
James: Well this lands on what our…two of my biggest issues I think.  But just imagine that we do all of the energy saving things that we’ve talked about and then we hae twice as many people in Crediton and then we double that again.  Well that’s what’s happening.  In 25 years well have twice as many and then in another 25 years we’ll double that. And i think that the biggest environmental problem is there’s too many of these two legged animals walking around.  And if there were any animal on the planet like that, we would say we need to cull.  
All: Laughing
James: And yet I meet people who say oh i want to have 6 or 8 kids.  And I hae to bite my tongue because like well you know, some years back I would have thought that was really neat, but right now, its the worst……..
Tim: Well the population increase in Crediton is not coming from people having more children is it?  It’s coming from people moving in.  
James: It’s the whole…it’s the planetary…that is the planetary…the biggest planetary problem.
Gill: China reduced it to one child per family, aren’t they?
James: Right.  So I am not proposing a solution, but an awareness as such…. How can we….the biggest thing I think I could do, is that if in the next couple of years I bump into someone who says they want to have 6 kids.  If I could respond to them ina way that is not self righteous and putting them down, but actually make them aware that whatever they do is counteract all my plastic bag efficiency and my travel efficiency for sure just by having one more consumer on the planet.  So anything if we could find a way to gently let people know be thoughtful about your reproduction, that it has an impact on our environment.  A huge impact.
Becky: A lot of people can’t afford to have 6 children. 
James: That doesn’t necessarily…. That doesn’t seem to stop people from the act of…..
Cheryl: Apart from children….we can’t control whether other people want to have 6 or 8 children and it would nice if they didn’t, but we still do things that are very polluting for the environment because back to what to what we as householders can do, we still want…we’ve got into the way of being able to have any form of food throughout the year, whether or not its in season because it comes from every other country in the world and we are talking about sustainability of using all these forms of transport and you’ve got lorries and planes endlessly every second of the day brining produce around the country.  So that comes back tot farmers market.
James: I agree withal of these points but we are going to need twice as many lorries and twice as many planes in 25 years.  And then we are going to need twice as many again.
Cheryl: The trouble is there’s not much individually we can do about that is there?
James: ………. Unless somehow……… well I’m not sure.  I certainly don’t find….
Tim: I’m not having 6 children anymore!
Moderator: Promise?
James: And easily I can get on my high horse and be self righteous but if somehow it was possible for me to have that influence it would be a bigger influence than any of the other things I think I could do.  And then I’ve got one more of those!
Cheryl: It’s going to have to take some natural disaster or in terms of disease like the flu epidemic of the early  1900s or ….the bubonic plague or something. It’s going to take something to have to wipe out millions of us.  I’m not talking about third world, it could be any of us. But we need to wipe out half the planet to survive.
James: Well no, I mean if everyone felt that one child was the right way to go that would be it.  But I don’t really want to propose that, but just o raise the awareness that it’s not all that cool to have a lot of kids but somehow to make that.  Well ok and the other point which is not all that easy is that is takes 16 times as much land to grown an animal and eat the animal as it does to eat the vegetable food in the first place.  So as long as we keep having more people, we got to chop down them rain forests and grow soy beans and raise cattle.  That’s what we’ve got to do.  So to protest against rain forest…. Now I am vegetarian, but if all people do as if you…cut it in half, if you cut down you are saving the environment. 
Becky: If you only have once a week [75.03] it would do a lot.
James: You are saving the environment.
Becky: And it was in the old days what people had.  When I was a child we only had once a week meat and the rest we had vegetable stew. Or whatever kind of vegetable stuff.
Cheryl: There’s intensive animal farming pigs across the planet, chickens and everything.  There’s a huge percentage of contributory gases to global warming.  It’s the amount that it contributes is enormous, absolutely enormous.  I think its more than transport, I read somewhere but I think its more than transport.
Moderator: Ia m really sorry to stop that because it is a really interesting discussion, I am looking my watch and we are slightly running out of time but thank you very much.  Last thing I want to ask you is to answer these four questions on this sheet.
James: People have something I didn’t get at first.
Moderator: Yeah you can get it too if you want.  
James: Do I want? Is it for me or for you?
Moderator: More for me.
James: Oh it’s not for me?  Then I don’t need it.