Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Thank you very much for being here today my name is Moderator I am a researcher from Exeter University working in the Geography department there and as I already explained this is a follow up meeting to our survey last year.  First thing I want to ask you to do is give an introduction round, if you can say just your first name and anything else you want to ask me or what you are doing at the moment, if not then just the first name, yes.  Starting to my left maybe.
Linda: Okay, my name is Linda and I’m not doing anything much I have just retired.
Chris: I am Chris and I teach and paint and do odds and ends but I am mostly at home.
Moderator: Thanks.
Keith: Keith, I’m married got several kids, I work for the RD&E Hospital.  Basically very interested in football and very interested in sort of what’s going on around here at the moment.
Moderator: Okay.
James: I am James, I am retired being the operative word, and end up doing a lot of work for my own children but I am concerned about traffic and the way things happen.
Moderator: Okay.
James: I have some views.
Moderator: Thank you we will share that, thank you.
Tim: I am Tim, got a family as well, two kids at primary school and I am a scientist.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  Okay, let’s start with a very general question to open everything up.  Do you feel that we need to change the way we travel at the moment?  That’s including daily travel, what you use to go shopping to go to work and visiting your grandchildren or whatever, or also including holidays, so who wants to go first?
Chris: Yes, I  think we need to change it hugely, and use cars much less and if public transport could be just a bit more and better and cheaper then I think we would, the sooner we do it the better.
James: The problem is public transport is already virtually maximised, you look at the trains, they can’t put the bigger trains on already...
Chris: I know, I know but we may not be able to travel, we have lived at the very pinnacle of luxury, we may have to say no we can’t do it anymore.
James: Or we could change things.
Chris: Yes, but we have got to do something quickly, I think.
James: My suggestion to changing, one of the key things I said was to actually point out that we have got a whole system of railways in our country that is under-utilised and especially in branch lines.  The present one is an ideal one, it’s a two line railway track that’s using one track, the other one could be used as a cycle way very cheaply.  It’s a very good idea to put in here and it would spread all over the country, because there’s huge amounts of railway land that’s not being used.
Chris: That were ex railway lines.
James: Well even live railway lines?
Chris: Yes
James: Because it’s very often there’s a live railway line but it’s only got one track being used.  It would take very little, to put up probably a couple of fences between them and you’ve got a easy flat, probably motor bus, small moped and bicycle track that would get them all away from the lorries because they are just frightening.  If you want to cycle in this country, it’s a cycle track only otherwise you are taking your life in your hands.  Sorry I responded to what you said.
Chris: Yes.
Moderator: Yes that’s great
Chris: There is a positive part to it.
Moderator: Very good thanks.
Linda: Yes I think we do need to change the way we travel but I think I don’t know that we are all a bit reluctant to do it, I mean it’s all very well to say they must change, but what are the alternatives, are they palatable alternatives.  
James: There are several.
Linda: Yes but I don’t want to cycle.
James: You’ve started me off now, I have got another one.  One that’s, most people have not paid much attention, I am sure you will know about it and it’s called the compressed air engine.
Linda: Right.
James: Everyone’s talking about electrical engines and energy, but compressed air engines are particularly brilliant for Denmark.   
Linda: I don’t know anything about them.
James: Well Denmark has got a lot of wind power.  Last year they produced, because I think one occasion 50% of their electricity came from wind power, but they have a big problem they don’t know what to do at night, the wind still blows at night.  Well if you put your cars are on small compressor, they have got a car now, they are building it, that will do 100, 120 km on one charge, pressure charge, okay.
Chris: So electricity made by wind?
James: Yes.  That’s the real beauty of this.
Chris: Right okay, great.
James: Denmark I think is ideal because they are already set up for it, they don’t even need special meters, they just have a night time duty, you charge your car up, it charges up with a small motor over-night, you go to work.  You could plug it into a plug at work or you can even, you can put a generator, what do they call it, the ones the electrical ones that absorb energy, on the actual car, whilst it’s parked for 8 hours in a car park.  So yes there is another way forward.  So millions and millions of people in our society can change, and get away from all, all of them can get away from petrol, or virtually all, not all, but this compressed air engine can also be used in combination with a petrol tank, with a small petrol engine.  I think most people don’t know, do you know about this?
Moderator: I have some ideas about that yes.
James: Some information.  But they reckon that 1 tank of fuel, this compressed air engine will cross America.
Linda: That’s fantastic.
James: One tank of fuel.
Linda: But I thought it was, thought to be problematic having enough wind power in this country.
Chris: The wind is..
James: No different to Denmark.
Chris: The wind is..
Tim: We are windier than them.
Chris: We are the windiest country in Europe. 
Linda: Then why are we making such a fuss about not having enough wind power?
James: That’s because the fuel fraternity don’t want them to disturb their presence in the field.  Some of them.
Tim: Well on-shore wind is a lot cheaper than off shore wind, and off shore wind, obviously at the moment the start up costs are large compared to fossil fuels, so obviously the easier option.  And also there’s a shortage of wind turbines.
James: Even China are importing huge amounts of wind turbines.  Again they are open to coal fired, generating power station every week at the moment, which is appalling but they are.
Moderator: Sometimes we have to get back to my list, but as I said its very interesting to get a good discussion
Tim: But I also think that people don’t, can also look for alternatives because the car is so convenient, you know there are other things to, ways to get to work and if you just look and  there are positives for them obviously might take a little bit longer, they always usually do us but you might get fitter or you might read your book on the train, or you might be able to do something else, whereas in your car is actually dead time and you’ve got to kind of appreciate the positives of as well.
Moderator: Keith, what do you think?
Keith: Well I think at the end of the day it’s about convenience isn’t it.  I mean I use my car to go backwards and forwards to work because it’s not convenient to get up an hour earlier to get a bus to be hanging around at work before I need to start, and then at the end of the day exactly the same.  So why should I spend another hour and a half, two hours a day travelling on public transport, which at the end of the day I mean at the end of the day as far as I am concerned is far too expensive and I actually get a discount because I work for the NHS, so I even get it cheaper but to me it’s still.
Tim: Well you know if you drive into Exeter and your driving back, the cost of doing that is getting need to £3.00 in a car and a bus is £3.50.
Keith: But it is convenience, the bus doesn’t go when I want the bus to go and it doesn’t take me all the way, door to door does it.
Tim: No I see, I mean that’s always a problem, you got to make.  You waive the fact that when you’re sitting in your car you are doing nothing and when you are sitting on the bus you know you may find something else to do that you may enjoy.  I do appreciate, I do know that cars are more convenient.
James: That sounds as though compressed air energy…
Keith: I know what you are saying about that, but what I was going to say in contrast to that was that the petrol companies will never let you do it.  Will never let them bring out…
James: Some are already in development.
Keith: I know but the petrol companies will find a way.
James: They have up until now.
Keith: They always will.
James: There is a change.
Keith: Too much power.
James: I agree with you, but I really feel this will happen this time.
Keith: Money quotes.
James: But if you can charge your compressed engine up and apparently it is something like 50 pence for a 150 km so that’s 70 miles.
Keith: But does everybody want to drive around in a milk float?
James: No it’s not a milk float!
Keith: No I know it’s not.
James: They are actually… they have brought out some cars that are much better.  Two seater ones that have just started.
Keith: Well that’s not a family vehicle is it!
Tim: Well most people don’t, if you are using it for work you don’t need it.  But then this is where all the taxing is wrong, you know you get taxed for having a car sitting on your drive, where you should be taxed for driving it.  I mean cost neutral for an average vehicle what you could, if you have a second car which maybe more efficient then you should tax away road tax and put it on petrol usage.
James: I have no problem with that at all.  I think that’s a very good argument.
Moderator: We will come back to the measures in the next…
James: Okay where do you want to go next.
Moderator: Really interesting discussion I think, thank you very much for that.  We already heard maybe some of the possible reasons for changes, necessary changes in travel behaviour.  Can you think of what reasons might be there to change travel behaviour?  You said maybe we are running out of petrol, would this be a reason?
Linda: There is climate change.
Chris: Yes climate change and not destroy all nature.  That’s quite a good reason.
James: Well I have just said about the two motor, bicycles going on rail tracks that are totally in efficient
Chris: Yes absolutely.
James: I think most, a lot of the routes could be used for cycle ways and you would get a huge amount of people off the road if you had a designated route for the cyclists, and they are there, they are existing, all you have to do is put some tarmac down, it’s really cheap.  Alright you might have to wrangle with the railway stations, but you can get something that’s called, when they buy it by direct…
Male: Compulsory purchase
James: Yes, compulsory purchase, our government have got rights to do that.  And lets face it they stole the property in the first place, just we want it, and I think it should be taken back from them because they are inefficient, and given to the people to use as cycle ways.  As I said in my letter you go to Europe, I saw a motor rally.
Keith: I was in Holland yesterday and every single road has got…
James: That’s wonderful isn’t it.  I saw a new motorway that had been built and it had a suspension bridge going across (12.18) not really sure, right beside it was a cycle way.
Keith: I think every road has to be built…
James: Both sides, not one side, both sides.  Out of the way so we can get all the noise and pollution, but it was brand new and they had spent a fortune on it and it was used.
Linda: So it’s political will then is it?
James: Worse than that (12.37) they are dreadful, it’s the thinking, you know, it’s just very dangerous, got more dangerous.
Linda: It’s got more danger as fewer people have been cycling, or have been cycling 50 years ago.
James: I love cycling and I have to put all my bicycles into my trailer with my grandchildren and my daughter and we go off to the different cycle tracks, it’s the only safe place to do it.  Which is what I am actually advocating, they are all there, all those railway lines are there.
Linda: Yes, but the question was are there any more reasons to change our…
Moderator: Yes I mean security I think was mentioned, safety.
James: I am a bit fitter, could do with more cycling.
Moderator: Okay, Keith what do you think is maybe congestion really a reason to change peoples travel behaviour?
Keith: It’s just interesting listening to different views.
Moderator: Me too.
Keith: Personally I mean to my mind I don’t necessarily agree with cyclist being allowed to ride on the road without paying any sort of cycle tax or road tax or insurance or anything like that.  Because I have seen cyclists cause so more accidents, not just involving themselves, but involving other people.  Cyclists don’t seem to stop at red lights, I am not, I am not trying to say I am anti cyclists at all, I am just, I have witnessed it myself, watched…
Tim: I would also like to say I have seen some really bad cyclists.  I was in Cambridge last week and exactly the same thing..
Keith: I know drivers I bad you know I mean you know.
Tim: When I do cycle everyday there is always times you have to turn left, because a car decided to turn left and you’ve got no choice about it.  It’s a very two way thing and I know drivers always thinking cyclists are a nightmare, but cyclists think cars are a nightmare and in equal measures.
James: I imagine most people own a bicycle in this country. Very, very few of them use them, it’s just too dangerous.
Keith: I sold them, because it was just impossible to ride on, you know the roads around here, I bought one thinking I would be able to cycling backwards and forwards to Exeter to work.
Linda: No.
Keith: The problem is a lot of cyclists don’t help themselves, they cycle out into the middle of the road now.  I mean I don’t know what this thing is with sort of cycling in the middle of the road. 
Chris: They used not to didn’t they?
Keith: They used to stay in sort of towards the kerb, but I appreciate there is man hole drains, whatever sort of thing, and I understand that, now struggling to come backwards and forwards between Exeter and Grenettan because of cyclists literally in the middle of the road.
James: Well I agree with you lets get onto the railway lines.
Keith: Yes well lets make them pay for it as well then.
James: I think as tax payers we already do.  
Chris: Well they are not doing very much damage, whereas the cars are doing such damage.
Keith: Our cars doing it or is it lorries doing it?
James: All of them.
Chris: All of them.
James: All of them fuel.  With cyclists there is no emissions at all, and I don’t know very little (15.51)
Moderator: I don’t know about statistic so much more you breathe when you use a bike, but anyway.
Tim: Back to burning fossil fuel, compared to that I think it’s pretty good.
Moderator: Yes, probably right, yes.  But mostly to know, very interesting point on my list, again a very general question, what is your view of current transport policy and you can think of local or even national level if you want to?
Tim: Is there one?
Linda: Exactly the same, is there a policy?
Moderator: Okay.
Tim: I thought it was called anarchy.
Keith: I mean the fact that they privatised the buses and they don’t connect with the train, you can’t use the same ticket on a bus and a train you know…
James: You can if you’re above 60, because then it’s all free everywhere.
Keith: Well trains aren’t free.
Linda: Trains aren’t free.
James: Aren’t they?  In Hungary they are.
Linda: They weren’t.
James: An Austrian friend of mine travelled on the train network and he just showed his passport.
Linda: Oh right excellent.  I mean the buses are a monopoly really these stage coaching and there is one or two others, you know they’ve taken over haven’t they.  There is not many others.
Keith: There is two isn’t there.
Linda: Yes.
Chris: The government has been disappointing, all through the labour government I did think they would do more about it.
Linda: No I agree, yes.
Keith: But its all separate companies and it’s just, there is no incentive for them, the only incentive is for them to make money.
Linda: Yes, maximise their profits.
James: I think national express is quite good.  I hate to travel on buses, I get car sick, I have travelled on national express last year, to Heathrow and I was impressed.
Linda: Yes, no that is good.
James: For a small company compared to trains that are running, they actually did quite a good job.
Keith: Well national express are also a train company.
James: Are they?
Keith: Yes.  They just got kicked off the East Coast line for poor service.
James: Well the buses are very good.
Keith: I think the first great western is an excellent service to London, ridiculously expensive if you go at the wrong time of day, but I think euro star is fantastic, you know I mean there is some great trains, but the (18.20) are not particularly long.
James: Well as we said earlier, the trouble is there are already virtually maximised for what they can do, I don’t even think they can schedule more trains in, they can’t put longer trains in, they’ve got (18.31) platforms.  So they are not able to use the system that’s there.
Chris: Well they might build longer platforms.
Tim: What from Dorchester to Exeter or something like that?
Chris: Well they hardly need them there yet, but they might in time.
Tim: I am just thinking they are already quite long and that’s half their problem, but I am just giving you a different way forward.  There are different ways of doing it, we just have to think in a different way, completely and radically sometimes.  Wouldn’t it be wonderful if they had a train system that wasn’t made of these huge great big long trains but a completely computerised system, with small modes of trains going in possibly different directions.  Maximise the traffic a bit more, we have the technology nowadays, maybe someone should think about that.
Chris: Computers take over.
Linda: Yes they could.
Tim: But we do have problems have, if you drive people out of their cars you do have problem
Linda: Systems in place.
Tim: All the buses and trains at rush hour are crazy but there are ways around it.  I can only come up with a couple of things off the top of my head, hope they help.
Moderator: Yes.
Tim: But I just look at Holland, I think you’re from Holland?
Moderator: No I am from Germany.
Tim: But it’s the same, I was in Germany just recently.  I go cycling there with my friends, it’s such a pleasure, anywhere, anywhere and Denmark is the same.  Denmark is unbelievable.  You know there is a real courtesy to cyclists, I mean a courtesy they are first, cars are flippant to cyclists.  And what that does is that you see huge amounts of people on the roads with bicycles.  That’s got to have an effect, got to have an effect.  You see them here and they are a target for the lorry driver or something (20.33) on the side of his door.  But over there they give way to the cyclist.
Chris: Another thing that might happen is that things might become more localised so that people won’t be travelling so far to work, I am not talking about you travelling to Exeter from here, but my husband works in Taunton and you know if he could be closer, you know in the old days we would have moved to Taunton and we’re not doing that because of the motorway, wouldn’t have been feasible in the old days and so it may just, I know people don’t like negative thoughts or talk about going backwards but it may just have to a bit and it may be no bad thing.
Keith: Yes I mean people have started working in more distant places….
Chris: Yes and flying to work.
Keith: Because they are able to do it.
Tim: Or working from home with a computer.
Keith: That clearly is the way forward.
Tim: I know someone who does actually do that.  In fact he is doing it tomorrow, works for a computer company and he will do, talking discussions via computer.
Keith: By the internet.
Chris: Oh well done.
Keith: (21.43)
Moderator: That brings me back to changing in travel.  Try to imagine, it’s a little bit complicated because some people, sometimes people struggle to imagine, but try to imagine an ideal world travel wise, we have the means of transport we have today but they are nearly perfect, let’s say public transport runs every 5 minutes or so to places where you want to go and cycling is convenient and cars are having less emissions and are environmentally friendly or whatever.  So if you wanted to change your own travel, how would you like to travel in an ideal world, would you change or would you use the same means of transport?
Tim: I would cycle.
Moderator: You would cycle, okay.
Tim: More.  I don’t cycle on the 377 because it’s too dangerous, but I cycle across Exeter.
Moderator: So it would be…
James: That’s pretty brave.
Moderator: …so for your safety would be….
Tim: There’s a cycle path virtually all the way to be honest.
James: Oh right.
Tim: But you just have to get to Exeter, you can’t start here for the reasons we have all been saying.
Moderator: Keith?
Keith: Yes I mean I think probably use public transport, but it would have to be something like, some sort of shuttle service, like a mono rail or something like that.  But I mean you are only talking 10 miles maximum aren’t you.  You know I mean you look at countries like Japan or whatever, you’ve got these bullet trains, and vast distances aren’t they.  But I think you know I mean I would certainly stop using my car so much if the bus service was reliable, if the train service sort of, I didn’t have to drive the car to park at the station or whatever, you know.  I mean at the end of the day who wants to add another hour to their working day.  To me it’s pointless, there is other things I could be doing in that hour, like sleeping!
Tim: Nothing wrong with that.
Moderator: No definitely not.  Okay thank you very much, that was all really interesting.  Now I want to give out.  We came up with some…here we go, some scenarios, you don’t have to be afraid that these measures listed here will be introduced in Crediton, Exeter or whatever, it’s purely hypothetic and I just want to ask you if you could think about these things and tell me if you think this would work for you or for others in general.
James: I think you’ve got a problem….
Moderator: Yes that’s right.
Chris : So whether they are desirable things?
Moderator: Pardon?
Chris: Whether they are good things?
Moderator: Yes if you can, mainly we are interested if you think this would work, a for you or for others to change travel behaviour.  And as I said for instance if you are a car user at the moment, we don’t want to introduce these things, it’s just to get an opinion and if you think this would work and I’ll give you a couple of minutes first but I will also read it out for you.  You can pick out single things, you don’t have to say scenario a 1 to 3 is perfect or would never work, or you can pick single measures and say you think this would be a good idea or I think this would never work or this is just rubbish.  Okay so let’s just go through the things, on about daily travel now.  So scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, already mentioned.  Improvements in public transport, punctuality and reliability, Keith just said that.  Smart card ticketing, simpler and reduced fares.  Major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements, increased taxation, we would need increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures, that’s scenario one.  Scenario two is a little bit more drastic, or a little bit more radical, including increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars emitting fuel pollutants and so an environmental point of view so to say.  Congestion charges in most towns and cities and more toll roads, paying to drive, you pay to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas.  And some of the results would be major improvements in public transport, resulting in major improvements in public transport services, significant reduction in congestion on major roads and significant reduction in carbon emissions.  Scenario three includes some restrictions again don’t be afraid that we want to introduce these things.  First thing is banning vehicles with highly polluting engines also related to environmental effects.  No car days, may be an option, one day a week or something like that.  Full or part pedestrianisation with no drives zones, we already have some cities with that.  Restrictions on the number of cars each household could own, could be an idea.  Major and sustained decreases in traffic levels would be a result.  Hopefully you switch over to public transport for its infrastructure, was already mentioned for structural things would be good to focus on and major reductions in carbon emissions. 
Chris: So you would like us to pick out one of them?
Moderator: If you want to, I think in general scenario two you agree would never work or scenario two would be brilliant, but the main idea is pick out single things and tell me I think this would work and this would be a good idea, or this would never work, yes.  Do you want to start Chris?
Chris: Oh well of course you know what I will think.  Scenario three of course it would be hard to do it, but I think we all have to do it sooner or later anyway, but I mean they are wonderful things all meanwhile with nothing else, they are all improvements aren’t they.  Accept perhaps building more roads in my opinion.  That’s my opinion.
Linda: I think if you start talking about banning vehicles I think you alienate a lot of people, I mean we have more or less got a consensus around this table about yes we ought to cut pollution and so on, but you know there are large sways of the population who haven’t got that message and if you start banning, so what I suppose I am saying is…. 
Chris: I wasn’t saying you do it now, sooner or later.
Linda: No well I think what we probably need is people to be more aware, educated, whatever you would like to say.
Tim: Do you think just some people don’t want to be educated though?
Linda: Well yes because it’s so convenient as it is maybe and you know as long as you, we can all get away with it, we can’t see the pollution, we don’t know that it is there. 
Tim: I know it’s off the subject but I mean does anybody here smoke?
Linda: No.
James: No.
Tim: I mean I used to I gave up over 10 years ago, but smoking kills and yet trying to get that message across you still see children today, you know smoking and their parents smoking and their parents smoking and you know even people that working at the hospital
Linda: Yes oh yes.
Tim: They have got to get out and have a cigarette.
Chris: At least mostly it only kills you.  But pollution is going to kill everybody.
James: Well if you look at my argument….
Tim: It’s the education point though.
Chris: Yes indeed.
James: …really compressed aired engines, I really think that is the answer, it solves virtually all the problems, there is no pollution with it, particularly if you do it from electricity from the air, from wind power, it makes it cheaper for goodness sake.  Instead of it costing you, I don’t know £5.00 or £8.00 or £10.00 to do that, miles per gallon there is no pollution at all, zero pollution and it will cost you a lot less.  It could be as little as 20 or 30p for the same travel, and yes at the moment cars will be limited in design but to be honest….
Linda: It doesn’t matter.
James: ….there is two different engines in development, I don’t know if you understand this or even heard of it, one is a traditional engine with a piston going up and down and the other one is a wankle engine, which is a rotary engine.  Now these rotary engines are like the size of a biscuit tin and they weigh about the same as that, about 1.5 kilos or something.  And the beauty of these is they can put on a site and you can combine them.  Now apparently you can make one that will go as fast as a Ferrari, although it doesn’t go very far, it will go 10 miles but it will go as fast as a Ferrari.  But the beauty of them, you can switch them in and out and it is all on compressed air.  You can use it for a lot of distance or less distance, so what you’re looking about, most of these ones in two and three would be answered by actually bringing this engine out.  Alright it won’t answer the question with the lorries at the moment and perhaps….
Tim: Do you have shares in this concept?
James: No, no.  But you look at what I am just saying it actually solves.
Tim: I understand what you’re saying.  It does, I mean I’m not trying to…
James: Well I am quite radically for the opposite to what you said with scenario three and possibly a lot about scenario two and what I have actually suggested just drives the whole thing around it, you don’t need that.
Linda: Except for maybe more congestion?
James: No because the cars will be smaller.
Linda: How much smaller?
James: They are small cars, you don’t need to huge cars, you can have two seater cars most of the time.
Keith: Which is okay if you haven’t got a family isn’t it?
James: Well you just have another one with four.
Linda: But there would be an awful lot of cars on the road.
Keith: My wife doesn’t drive!
James: Ah, get a bicycle.
Keith: She’s not allowed to ride a bicycle either.
James: Tricycle!
Chris: Will it be better for the Exeter road or not
Linda: Well that’s the thing isn’t it, yes.
Chris: No it sounds brilliant, lovely thing to have.
James: But to be honest it does answer a lot of the problems of what you are saying in scenario three.
Moderator: Probably, yes.
Tim: I have a problem with this paying to drive, especially pay more in congested areas, because all that does is, is spread out the car use during the day so there is a reduction in congestion but the same amount of miles are driven, therefore potentially does it reduce carbon emissions practically because you’re not queuing as much and therefore (32.41).  It’s just forcing people to drive at more anti social hours at the end of the day if you charge people to drive during the rush hour period.
James: The big problem most of us have got here is that we have got cars because we have to have cars, the transport systems are dire to say the least and the option of a bicycle isn’t an option, not here, so you have to drive, and that drives you into the point, well hang on a minute they want you out of the city, so they are going to put you in a car park, then you have to get onto a bus and pay these huge amounts of money.  For the people who live in the city it’s fine, because they don’t need a car, because of services.
Tim: You see I don’t think it is a huge amount of money, honestly I think £3.50 for a return to Exeter is not a huge amount of money, when you compare it to a car.
James: Maybe you are right.  I didn’t know that was the charges, I have not been on the train
Tim: Yes well train again, train again is get one of these railcards it’s only £2.60 return to Exeter if you, apart from the peak, but I mean yes again it’s education, if you are thinking of trains.  I mean I have been travelling on the trains and buses for the last six years and you know they are pretty punctual, they are not there every single day 100%, but I would say 99% of the time they are there and they get you to where you want to be and, but yes in terms of some designs of buses, in terms infrastructure and things like that, not marvellous.
James: The problem we have also got is that the…..
Tim: But also own a car as well because if you want to go Exeter it’s fine, but if you want to go North or South or West….
Chris: Somewhere more obscure.
Tim: …it clearly isn’t very useful.
James: Well the train station its self is placed in a very poor position.  Okay there are several amongst us that we walk down there, but I have to admit its not…
Tim: (34.32) drive down there is actually…..
James: A lot of people say I am not going to do the walk down there first thing in the morning, or when you come home from work, you are absolutely shattered and you’ve got how long, 20 minutes, 25 minutes walk from the station, that’s just crazy, so the station is in the wrong place.
Chris: Accept that it’s good to walk a bit each day.
Keith: (34.53)
Tim:           Drive must be a nightmare after, when you are walking out the park.
James: So going back to the systems are wrong and they need to be radically looked at.  I have come up with two solutions, I am sure there are other solutions.
Moderator: Yes, sure.
James: But they have got to go a long way.  Don’t know.  Try your next question.
Keith: I don’t suppose you have anything about car sharing or something in there.  
Moderator: Interesting, yes.
Keith: That seems to be something, different car sharing.
Moderator: Yes, so what do you think about that?
Keith: Well I actually sort of looked into it.  I do take somebody with me, my stepdaughter works at the same place, not in the same place but she works at the hospital, so more often than not I take her as well, but she works different hours to me, so of course either way we sort of end up having to, she sits and reads the paper in the morning, while I go into work and in the afternoon I have to sort of hang around for her.  Which isn’t a problem but its sort of solving two people getting there,  and we know there is other people living in Crediton that work there, and we sort of said to them do you want a lift sort of thing, you know if you want to contribute towards the fuel or whatever and people sort of ‘oh know I’d rather get the bus’, ‘fine ok’, and then you say ‘what time bus do you get?’, ‘7 o’clock’, okay we don’t even leave until 20 past 7, so you start thinking if people, everybody has got a mind of their own haven’t they you know, at the end of the day it’s freedom of choice, I mean we’d all probably like to reduce the emissions that our cars are push out, I agree with that, you know, if there’s a way of producing vehicles with this idea…
James: Look on the web, on the web page ‘tatter’ ‘compressed air engines’.
Keith: Fantastic but I think putting more cyclists on the road is not the way forward.
James: I agree with you, I don’t want them on the road, I think it’s a nightmare.
Keith: I mean you know, having gone up and down Bridge Road so often from Marshbutton up towards the hospital, over the past eight, nine years, the number of times you are driving up there and there are 1, 2, 3, I think there’s 4 separate crossings where the cyclists come up and they press the button, the lights go red, everybody stops and the cyclist cycles across, gets on the cycle path and they get a bit further up and they think ‘oh I’ll go the other side now’ and I’ve watched, I’ve watched some people do it, I’ve watched some families do it as well, because it’s all been queuing and whatever, lots of traffic around and they will literally do the first set of lights and everybody stops, they all go across, they cycle up.  You sort of watch them and they get up to the next one, where the swing bridge is and want to go across to the other side, then they go up a bit further and they come back across again.  You know it’s such, I mean if that’s not causing more pollution by making cars stop and start, stop and start..
Tim: It’s the same as pedestrians, pedestrians have got the right to cross the road as well.
Keith: Yes that’s right, yes.
Tim: And realistically they are doing the same thing.  It’s just they are doing it like the equivalent pedestrian.  That’s why that’s organised.
James: But I’d have, there was a thing in the papers…
Keith: The cars will never be …
Tim: But the vast majority of people probably want to get from A to B, in the most efficient way.
Keith: Then if you provide something like a cycle lane, all the cyclists should use it shouldn’t they.
Tim: I agree with that.
Keith: They shouldn’t be out in the middle of the road, going up Bridge Road, at quarter to eight in the morning, when there is cars and lorries everywhere.
Tim: The problem they’ve got is, have you seen the cycle path, it’s about that wide, that is so bad, it’s very difficult to ride a bicycle in that distance.
Chris: Going up..
Tim: The only cycle way in this town, have you seen it?
Chris: Yes up Jockey Hill.  
Keith: Jockey Hill!
Chris: That is amazing…
Linda: Everybody parks there.
Tim: They are all parking the cars.  But the cycle ways are too narrow.  I agree with you, I think they shouldn’t be on the road, and I think that the answer is in areas where it is possible they should, and they are starting to do it in places, it’s all over Europe.  And that is actually a especially when they have the pavements to do so.  Designate the pavement as a pedestrian and a cycle way, and show it clearly which can be used, and that does work.  It really does.
Chris: And isn’t there another, I can’t think what it’s called, but where there are no markings on the roads in towns, and the traffic is allowed through but they don’t know someone might walk across, or a horse might come, or there might be pedestrians, then everyone behaves much better.  
Linda: They are having this in one or two towns here.  Taking off all the road markings..
Chris: But it would make you go slow.
Linda: Makes you stop and think.
Chris: Even so, through Crediton!
Tim: I had an incident…
James: It’s 10 miles an hour anyway…
Tim: I was going to say about motorcycles, we haven’t mentioned them, I actually have a small motorbike that I use.  As a motorcyclist on one trip in the station area, I live up in Threshers, I had 3 near misses in one trip recently.  
James: Was this turning right?
Tim: No, they were all different, one as I came up to the junction where the motorcycle shop is, just before I got there I topped the brow of the hill, and, I’ve got a headlight on my bike, and it’s on, and the woman saw me, was looking at me the whole time and drove directly in front of me, turned off in front of me.  So I anchored up and I nearly fell off, and that, she had eye contact the whole time!  So she deliberately did it..
Linda: She was looking but not seeing.
Tim: I think that might be the case, not really sure, it didn’t make any sense.  I then went further up the town and as I got to the shops here, a car just pulled out of a parking space directly in front of me again, and I actually sort of avoided him, I went around them sort of, and he sort of went huh.  I am sure he didn’t see me, but again I’ve got my headlight on, on the motorbike.  And there was a further incident at the top end of the shopping area where someone did something, I can’t remember what that was, but it was a third incident, but in one trip!  That’s the psychology of motorists, that’s the problem, you see it advertised on the television all the time, Think Bike, but they don’t.
Keith: No true.
Tim: And that’s a problem with the car driver.  
Keith: Yes, there is also a problem with motorcyclists, where 30 means 30, 40 means 40, and 50 means 50…
Tim: I agree with you…
Keith: Not 80 or 90.
Tim: I agree with you, and it’s really irritating when a motorcyclist goes past a queue of 200 cars that have been parked there far too long, and they go all the way along to the front, and overtake, or..
Keith: That’s fair enough..
Tim: Or they go in the second lane between, between the second and third lane on a motorway at 80 miles an hour.  That’s also a little irritating.  And dangerous, but they do it.  
Linda: Can I make a point about, it’s not here, it might have been about public transport, and that’s the safety, I mean I would use public transport more, but I actually think at night I would be quite wary of it really.  I mean if you are in the centre of Exeter, and going to that bus station, which is so grotty…
James: It’s disgusting.
Linda: It is nasty isn’t it?  And then, you know there have been times when I’ve been on a bus, or on a train, and you sort of look round at everyone, and you don’t feel safe.  And I don’t know how other countries deal with that, I don’t know.  But certainly it would be something I would think about, my own personal safety.  And the other thing I think about with public transport is that you get soaked to the skin waiting, you know there’s, are there any bus shelters in Crediton? 
Chris: Yes there are.
James: There’s one on the Green, yes.
Linda: At this end of town, if you are walking back..
Chris: Not on the Green.
Linda: But down here…
Chris: Yes there’s a shelter..
Tim: There is one at the Tourist Information, but then from that point onwards…
Linda: There’s none..
Tim: There’s nothing.
Linda: Right.  And you are just standing there.
James: There is one outside the new Tescos.
Linda: Oh yes.
James: It’s one of the first things that got put up!  Bus shelters on either side of the road.
Linda: Anyway that’s my personal gripe.
Moderator: Yes, very interesting.  Thank you very much.  Unfortunately I have to go on with the topic.
Linda: You set me off.
Moderator: Yes.  Next thing I want you to think about, unfortunately holiday travel is a little bit contributing to some of the problems we are discussing.
Linda: Oh yes.
Moderator: So we did the same thing with relating to holiday travel, and set up a couple of potential measures, and again I want to go through and see if there’s anything that you think could work, or would work for you, to change travel behaviour in view of holiday trips, and again I will go through these things.  Again it’s purely hypothetical, so don’t be afraid that, I mean some things are already in use, or have been introduced but we don’t want to, it’s just to get an opinion of these things, and your views on it.  Scenario 1 includes a, encourages carbon off setting schemes, and subsidise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs, I think this has already been mentioned.  Provide temporary based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave, incentivise UK holidays pass through tax breaks or not paying VAT for UK holidays, that’s Scenario 1.  Scenario 2, again with more radical approaches, increased air passenger tax, and duty on aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane could be an idea, and invest the tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK, could be an option.  And Scenario 3 is just one bullet point, but it’s a really comprehensive scheme including provide citizens with carbon budgets restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, like flying, daily travel, energy use at home, they can undertake.  So that somebody gets carbon budgets so to say, and if he wants to fly to a destination for a rave, then he has to maybe reduce carbon, the use of carbon credits at home or something, thereby travelling differently every day, or something like that.  
Linda: I don’t see how you would monitor that. 
Tim: Well I think you would monitor it on the most important things like fuel use at home, and obviously it could be like a little swipe card when you go to an airport you swipe your card and they would take off the carbon credits for that journey.  Same as you could do on the train, or when you buy petrol you would swipe the same thing.
James: Interestingly enough, aeroplanes are actually very efficient, per person, per mile, they are very efficient, much more efficient than your car.  And people don’t think about that.  
Chris: They use less carbon per mile than your car
James: Per person, per mile than you car, oh yes.  Quite a lot less.
Moderator: Yes.  (46.25) distance flown.
James: Most people don’t understand that.
Moderator: Some people travel across the Atlantic, that’s, I don’t know…
James: That’s why the prices are so low, if they can actually do it so low, you have to start realising….
Tim: Also they don’t have any aviation tax.
Chris: They are not to be taxed either.
James: The tax is there but I am actually talking about the amount of fuel you buy.
Tim: No but….
James: And it’s something like half or something like that, it is a lot more efficient than using your car, a lot more efficient.
Chris: Why have we been told that it wasn’t then?
James: Sorry?
Chris: Why have we been told that its more?
Tim: Because cars are driven in single occupancy whereas your aeroplanes are flown….
James: Full
Chris: Full
James: Well near full.
Tim: …high capacity.  Trains are a lot more efficient than planes.
James: Yes that’s right.  But people have chosen to choose aeroplanes as a very inefficient forms of travel.
Tim: They also put pollution in different parts of the atmosphere as well.
Chris: Which is quite, in a worse part.
Tim: Which is potentially a….
James: (47.17)
Chris: Well apparently it’s worse because of where it is, isn’t that so?  Because of where it is and what it does to the atmosphere?
Moderator: Depends from one point of view, the problem is that it’s a growing business and we are still upping passenger numbers and the altitude is always a problem that, the altitude of the emissions and combined effects with the CO2 and alu-particulates and these things.  So yes that is one of the main reasons why we are focusing on trying to reduce air travel.  I mean one of the main problems from an environmental point of view is with localised airlines there is increasing, still growing market, with people just flying to destinations in Europe and just for the weekend of something like that.
Chris: People fly nightly just for a party of something.
Moderator: But anyway, first thing….
Chris: Well I go for scenario three because of that problem.
Moderator: Do you see any problems with that?
Chris: Yes it would be very hard to do but it’s, I think that is the fairest thing, probably have to be a dictatorship. 
James: Your communism then, oh excellent.
Chris: Are you going to be a dictator
James: (48.40)
Tim: It’s obviously the people, if you have got enough money, your carbon, buying more carbon.
Chris: But that’s why if it was each person was given a limited number then it would cover that.
Tim: But you see that’s the thing that would be unpalatable to people, you see, western world 
Chris: There would be black markets.
James: Black markets.
Tim: All this kind of encouraging carbon offsetting schemes which are an interesting idea in an ideal world would work very well, but unfortunately…
Chris: They don’t.
Tim: ….are they going to do it anywhere and they have to make sure, this thing that they are going to do which is going to reduce carbon, they wouldn’t have done unless they got paid this money for carbon offsetting.  That’s a really hard question to answer truthfully, so you give it to some country to build hydro electric dam or whatever and would they have done that anywhere, so it’s very hard to get carbon offsetting schemes to be absolutely concrete in terms of actually reducing carbon.
James: I just look at it and think, okay they are almost certainly going to reduce these things into our country causing huge chaos, huge amounts of expenses for people, when the rest of the world, to be honest there is one particular country that’s an up and coming country that I visited 2 years ago and it’s got an immense population and they are not even interested in reading the first word of this, called China.
Chris: No they are interested.
James: They are not carrying out any of these things.
Chris: Sorry?
James: They are not doing anything about it.
Chris: They are doing more than American or anyone else is doing.
James: America is one of the worst pollutants in the world.  
Chris: Well I know it is.
James: China is pretty well just about behind them.
Tim: No no.
Chris: No no.
Tim: Per head of population they are way below.
Chris: Per head it’s very very low.  It’s almost nothing.
James: Yes but it’s coming.
Chris: Of course it’s coming up but they can see the deserts happening on their Western edge, they know what’s going on.
James: Not what I have seen.
Chris: Well they do.
James: Not what I have seen.  When I visited Beijing something that was startling to me, you know we have got the M25 around London, it’s a very busy congested motorway.  Beijing has a population of 18 million, 18.5 million.  They already have 5 M25’s circling their city.  They are full.  They are now building at the same time 4 more ring roads around Beijing that will have 9 M25’s circling Beijing.  They are building that now.  That will give you an idea of how many cars, this backward country is driving.
Chris: Well that’s Beijing, that’s the very centre of it.
James: No you can look at a lot of the countries.  I travelled a lot the distance…
Chris: It’s a very big country.
James: I agree with you.  The places I went to, I went to Chundo, Chunching, they were huge and very much traffic orientated, the ritual days have gone, this is not rituals, yes they have got a lot of motorbikes, they have got quite a lot of bicycles as well interestingly, but they have got huge amounts of cars, I mean huge.  They have got the bullet trains and all the rest of it, but that’s where our pollution is coming from on this plant.  That’s where it is coming from now, let alone soon.
Chris: But it’s coming more I think from, well doesn’t it break even with America output?
Tim: America uses more, but the interesting thing is when they produce all these lovely plastic gadgets for us to all use, we import them all, we want to buy them.
Chris: Yes it’s our fault for buying them.
Tim: But that carbon input is not considered to be part of the UK’s carbon budget.
Chris: Yes it goes onto China.
Tim: It’s China’s budget because they made the things, but we import it so the reason why China is growing as fast as it is, because it’s producing goods at the price people want to pay.
James: The bright thing on the horizon as far as I am concerned, China doesn’t respect something called copyright, they just steal things and I think the compressed air engine, what you said about big petrol companies, they will just do it and that’s the big chance for this world if start building it, they will absolutely slaughter all our manufacturing companies, because they are so big and if they start before us, they know about it and they have interest in it and they put it in their country, it’s a brilliant thing to do, but then they will steal all our companies.  All our companies are going to be ‘oh well you see that oh we invented it, oh really’.
Chris: Yes it might happen like that.
James: That’s where the pollutants are coming in, make no mistake of it.
Keith: I don’t think the Saudi’s will let them buy it, I think the Saudi’s will buy it first.
James: Saudi’s have got so much money they don’t know what to do with it now, just don’t know what to do with their money, so…
Keith: Buy a football club.
James: But if you want to look at these measures, these measures are futile, they are aggravating, irritating, expensive and we really do need to do something about what’s going abroad.  In the world you have got several countries that don’t give a monkeys at the moment, and I know you have got views about China, but with due respect I don’t agree with you.  But from my visit to there I, my eyes were opened dramatically.
Chris: When was that?
James: Two years ago.
Chris: Oh well it may have changed a bit.
James: Yes it’s got worse.
Chris: America is the….
James: I believe America is at the moment, you just wait if you are opening, which they are two coal fire stations every week, in China, new ones.
Chris: And coal burning underground because it got caught alight by mistake, it’s sending up nearly as much again, which is horrific, in China.
James: Well yes they’ve got that.
Tim: And there is oil spills in Canada, I mean there is a whole strain of things.
Chris: Absolutely, and they have found lots of lovely new oil just off the Gulf of Mexico
Keith: My mother, she came, went over to China for a three week holiday and she came, she said when she came back everybody in the city centre is walking around with either, one of these masks.
James: Beijing is better.  Well you saw it on the Olympics.
Keith: Terrible.
James: But you know they cleaned it up for that.
Chris: Yes they did, they stopped all the traffic didn’t they.
James: I flew into Beijing from, I can’t remember, we flew directly to Beijing and in the aeroplane just before we landed we smelt it and we saw this sort of yellow haze and it was a really yellow haze and you went down through it and it was a different colour, a grey colour and then we landed on the ground and from that moment on there was no clear visibility, you could not see more than, probably about a mile or two in the sky.
Chris: Yes.
James: The whole time we were there, we were there I think 5 days, 4 days and it was acrid.  It was really quite horrible, and they were in, that was before the Olympics, probably two months before.
Tim: That’s local pollution, that’s going to kill the local Chinese.
James: Yes but it’s all over China, a lot of the big cities have got a problem.
Tim: Yes I know I understand that, I understand that, but you know in terms of carbon dioxide and things like that I think that’s, you know I mean so therefore I mean do the same way that we decided in the 1960’s that clear air act came in, Chinese people might decide that they don’t want to live in that, which limits their life by…..
James: They have no choice.
Tim: Well you know.
James: It’s a problem.
Tim: It’s a very strange thing.
Keith: They do what they are told don’t they.
Tim: I agree but at some point there is a breaking point and when your life expectancy is reduced by x number of years because of how you’re living your life, then maybe they will do something about it.  And if they won’t maybe they’ll just all die.
James: Do you know what their major pollution is?  And it’s not petrol engines.
Linda: Coal?
James: No.  It’s manufacturing concrete.  I know that sounds bizarre but it’s true.
Tim: Most of theirs is actually ozone, ozone that is causing most of their photo chemicals in the city areas.
James: But it’s caused by them making so much concrete, they actually stopped concrete production around Beijing for the Olympics, that was why and they did reduce it a certain amount.
Tim: Because concrete would be quite a huge input of energy, I mean it produces an enormous amounts of nitrogen tails.
James: Precisely.
Tim: And all that in Crediton.
Chris: I think I will go home and have a drink.
Moderator: Yes, we are nearly finished.
Linda: We were talking about holidays weren’t we?
Chris: Yes we were.
Keith: We haven’t even talked about what Africa’s doing.
Chris: Yes.  Well Africa…
Keith: Or India, I mean you look at India
Linda: India is, I don’t know about Africa.
Keith: Carbon dioxide emissions and whatever.
Linda: Per person nothing compared with us.
Tim: It is nothing compared to what we are doing at the moment.
Linda: Africa almost nothing compared with us.
Chris: Yes, yes.
Tim: I think that’s why you’ve got to look on it as per person, because in a fair world why should we burn three times as much, or produce three times the carbon dioxide.  I agree China is increasing enormously, but they’ve still got an enormous way to go before they get to our level of consumption.
James: I question that.
Tim: No I really think you’ll have to go back and look at your facts, to be honest.
James: Well not the facts, I am just going on my eyes, just look at the amount of cars on the road.
Tim: (58.19) in China, I mean you’ve got to include Tibet in China and things like that where the poverty levels.
Chris: It’s a huge country.
Tim: So yes I agree in certain areas of China you know it is definitely growing.
Linda: Part of the problem is that some countries don’t even acknowledge that there is climate change.  I don’t think America does, does it.  But the official policy…
Tim: It does now.  They are actually going to be involved in Copenhagen.
Linda: But they didn’t.
Tim: No, Bush was…
Linda: No they didn’t accept that there was any.
Chris: Well half of them did but they weren’t enough.
Keith: Did Bush bother running?
Moderator: Good question?
Tim: No comment.
Moderator: Okay, sorry to interrupt that is a really an interesting discussion for me and for you and me to.  We are approaching the hour mark, so one last question.  A very general one again, to get you to change your travel behaviour, or your behaviour in general, or you think others to change their travel behaviour, what are the key messages we need to hear from whom and what policies needs to change?  I mean we already mentioned a lot of things, if you can go back to that point and think about the key messages to say to you or others.
James: Stop the petrol companies buying out the compressed air engine.
Moderator: Okay.
James: That would be a big thing.
Tim: Get countries to sign onto (59.42) 
Chris: Yes, yes.  I think it’s got to be something, it’s a kind of psychological thing, that if we all do it it’s fine but why should I do it in my little thing, because they’re not.  So it’s a change in the psychological attitudes.
James: Well it would have to be a government decree or something like that.
Chris: Well I thought that would happen under a labour government and it hasn’t.
Linda: So did i.
James: They’ve done everything else haven’t they.
Tim: Well they go scared off by you know fuel tax protests and things like that.  They stopped all their environment measures on that.
Chris: Yes.  So the question is….
Tim: (1.00)
Chris: Sorry.  What would change our attitude.
Moderator: If you think that’s necessary, yes.  Or if you think you are already behaving….
Chris: Yes if the price of petrol really went up then it would change.
James: Well that would destroy the infrastructure of our country.
Chris: I think it maybe better than destroying everything else.
Keith: I am laughing because I am looking at the scenario.
Tim: But I think (1.00) sort of positive way of taking up road duties, sorry road tax, your annual fee and put that money onto petrol and you pay more to drive.
Keith: But would you drive less?
James: The problem is our countries already done that.
Tim: But not….
Chris: Not to effect everyone.  But not very much, not to effect everyone really seriously.
Tim: Well they are bringing it in, it’s a slow thing and they have to put, they have to make sure they give enough lead time for these people, so people can change their cars before they get stung by it.  So I agree they are changing their behaviour, but you know, car companies have not done enough to reduce fuel consumption of cars.
James: It’s not in their interest to.
Chris: No it’s not is it.  Well it will be if the petrol risk is not there.
James: Well they are saying, what is it 30 years, possibly the oil reserves might be running out.  Seriously low.
Tim: Well it’s just typical, then again they keep finding new bits of oil and because the price of oil goes up and it means….
Chris: It’s worth getting it out of the horrible places.
Tim: Exactly.  Who knows but maybe the compressed air engine (1.02)
James: It’s there.
Tim: Yes all the battery power.
James: I know the government is recognising battery power, electric engines, electric motors, but really what I’ve been looking at and I have said it before, several times, about compressed air engines, I truly believe it’s the answer, because if you combine it with the windmill job and the solar power on the actual car its self…
Tim: But then a battery in a car can do the same thing.  Use wind power to charge up your battery, use a solar panel to charge up your battery.
James: But there’s a difference, it runs out.  To get it to run for a distance the compressed air engine has actually got the combination….
Tim: I don’t really know the technicalities
Chris: Maybe we all ought to buy shares in this compressed air.
James: Just look on the internet and its got a video showing everything I have said about them.  Which nobody else seems to mention, just me, in all my life wherever I go I’ve mentioned this.
Linda: You are a voice in the wilderness.
James: But it’s there and it’s a magnificent thing to be taken up with and nobody seems to be saying anything about it.  And I am very worried about what you said.  You are quite right that petrol companies are responsible and could cause a problem and don’t think (1.03) I know tatter has taken it up, its an Indian car manufacturing company, they can produce it, they are talking about producing it on the road for about £4,000.
Moderator: Thank you very much.
James: Sorry.
Moderator: No problem.  That was really interesting for me.