Moderator: Good afternoon everybody.  My name is Moderator I’m a researcher from Exeter University and we are having a project on travel behaviour, what means of transport people use how they move from one place to another. And this is a randomly selected group of people and we really want to ask you about your opinions, it’s a really relaxed discussion there is no wrong or right, the only thing I want to ask is that you let one person at a time speak so that we can sort it out on the recordings.  As I said the first thing I want to ask you is a short introduction round so as I said my name is Moderator and maybe lets start to my left.
Ross: I’m Ross
Moderator: Are you from… You are all from.(Trowel Collumpton??)0:00:55
Ross: Yes I moved here last August.
Violet: Hi I’m Violet
James: I’m James
Hazel: I’m Hazel
Rebecca: I’m Rebecca
Moderator: Nice to meet you all.  Yeah let’s start with something to do for you if you need some help just ask me.  Don’t think too much about it its just filling out these forms asking you about your normally used mode of transport for different purposes, as I said just what pops into your mind just fill it in and mutually talk about it.  Hazel do you need….
: I’ve got one here.
Moderator: And if you have some alternative for the imagined mode of transport then you can fill that in too.  If there’s no alternative that’s also fine you don’t have to think about that.
Moderator: Hazel we also start to talk about it if it’s too… You can really leave it
Hazel: I thought I had my specks but I’ve got an empty case.
Moderator: We can start with you - you don’t have to fill this out.  Do you ant to tell me about these things?  For instance let me ask the first question to you; which modes of transport do you usually use and is it maybe different for different purposes, lets say if its different if you go shopping or for leisure trips or if you go to visit friends or family.
Hazel: Well I have to get the bus to go to the health centre because it a way out of Collumpton I couldn’t walk its too far, and I do go coach trips with friends occasionally but I have difficulty walking and I do find it difficult to get on a bus now because I’m short and its difficult getting on.  But some of the newer busses they let the step down can’t they but they’re not all like that, but I have to go very slow I have to go carefully because I’m 87 you see I’m getting on.
Moderator: I didn’t expect that, 87 wow.
Hazel: So I’m fortunate that I can do it at all.
Moderator: Ross is it maybe different for you, are you using other things?
Ross: Mainly a car I have to say I occasionally use other forms of transport but it’s fairly rare, I think since I’ve moved here I’ve actually been into Exeter twice by bus which is a novel experience.
Moderator: When did you move here?
Ross: I work from home so other than going out to see clients and stuff which occasionally I look at going by train because I have meetings in London and then each time I decide at £170 round trip it’s cheaper to go by car even with congestion charges and parking and what have you and the cost of petrol.  So mostly I use a car.
Moderator: James
James: If I was doing a big shopping trip I would use a car because of obviously carrying things back, if was just shopping in Collumpton for the odd bits and pieces then I walk for that purpose.  Going to work I walk because I live so close to my place of work and most other things I would use the car, occasionally because I’ve got young children in the summer holidays and we wanted a trip out and our car wasn’t available to us then I would use the bus perhaps to go to Exeter or Tiverton for swimming or going to the park and things like that.  I do variety really.
Moderator: Rebecca what is it for you?
Rebecca: Well it is the car for everything really because that’s the way I feel safest, I drive my self with or we go together out in the car and it means that wherever we go I’ve always got an easy means of getting home, whereas I would feel quite vulnerable I think going on public transport.  The last time we went on a train it was a really really awful experience, it was difficult to cross from one platform to another and there wasn’t a lift because it was a tiny little station – Castle Carey – and we missed one train and there wasn’t another for about four hours and the toilets were locked on the station, so if ever I think of when I could possibly try public transport again I think of that journey and think no I wont.  So I really do stick to the car.
Ross: It was half five in the evening and there was no staff so the whole station was locked up and Castle Carey is a fairly major interchange so it was a genuinely bad experience.
Rebecca: I would like not to be so dependant on the car, I mean I haven’t been on a bus really so I don’t know how easy it would be to get on and off but I really wouldn’t want to do it on my own whereas I’m quite happy to go out in the car on my own.
Moderator: Ok thanks
James: If I have a choice of using my car or a bus, a few weeks ago I had to visit the hospital and I couldn’t get my car so I went on the bus but it meant I had to allow the whole day just for one hospital visit whereas if I had my car I perhaps would have left 45 minutes before the appointment and e home again 45 minutes after it had finished, but going on the bus I was gone all day so time had quite a lot to sway you on your decision.  And the cost of doing the journey I weighed it up would have probably been the same in the car or the bus after I paid for parking fees because there was two of us travelling so the cost was about the same but it was just the time factor really.
Moderator: Violet is it?
Violet: Yeah. Mine is quite straight forward.  Locally I walk but anywhere else its car and it would be a real last resort to catch the bus I’d rather phone my father and say ‘come and get me’ than get on a bus, we’ve been on several times and its just how long it takes really to get anywhere.  I walk most places because I haven’t got the car all week but if I’m going anywhere out of Collumpton it the car.
Moderator: Ok.  Let me add something for you is there maybe something you like about the way you travel, you say you often use the car what do you like about it?
Violet: I just like driving, I can go when I want leave when I want and it’s up to me you haven’t got to wait for a bus in the rain and they don’t come along then you get three, it’s just easier and quicker.
James: Actually my experience of going to Exeter to visit the hospital I found myself at the bus stop knowing the bus should have been there at quarter to eleven and it didn’t arrive and then I started to panic because I would be late for my appointment, because the bus was almost ten minutes late and I actually got to the front of the hospital as my appointment was due, rushed inside and discovered my appointment was at the far end of the hospital so again that was just a time thing that actually got me into quite a panic because the bus had been late and I was expecting it to run on time which I shouldn’t have done.
Ross: As 0:09:44 we have a lot to do with the hospital and they assume that people will be late because they wont be able to find anywhere to park so they do tell me that they give you half an hour leeway.
James: That was one of my things on making the decision, well if I did manage to get my car they say not to use the car park because it often gets full use the park and ride and I thought if I was going to use park and ride I might as well get on the bus straight from Collumpton really but I did have this panic about being late.
Rebecca: The other nice thing about the car is you can carry lots of things in it.  We take the doing with us for little trips out, I use it as half my office I sometimes work from home but I’ve got lots of stuff in the car that just travels around with me so I’ve always got it, I couldn’t do that if I was going on the bus.
Moderator: Hazel, are there things you maybe don’t like about the way you have to travel?
Hazel: Well I don’t travel an awful lot now fortunately I have friends who help me out with appointments because I belong to this church and all my good friends are here and they’re all very kind to me 0:11:02 xxxxx
Moderator: So you said do you sometimes use the bus?
Hazel: I do occasionally yes.
Moderator: Are there things you like about it or don’t like about it?
Hazel: Well it’s getting on and off is the biggest problem with me and slipping down I’ve got to be very careful I don’t fall over- arthritis.
James: I like travelling on the bus because you get to look at the scenery, whereas if you’re driving the car you’ve got to concentrate on the road as such.
Violet: I just feel there should be seatbelts because they drive like idiots (some of them) and you’ve got your children there’s no seatbelts which the children are used to actually its strange not to have a seatbelt on.  I just feel they ought to have something to feel a bit safer.
Hazel: It is a good service in Collumpton isn’t it.  It’s often.
Moderator: Ross you mentioned you sometimes have to travel for your work to visit clients is this a lot of travel or is it xxxx12:25 xxx.
Ross: It varies, it‘s no a huge amount.  I mean this week I’m going to Birmingham, next week I’ve got to be in London for a day so sometimes its twice in one week sometimes it’s not for several weeks, I’m mostly at home working.
Moderator: You mentioned for instance petrol prices, I wonder did your travel behaviour maybe change during the last months?
Violet: My husband’s cycling because we can’t afford the diesel and I travel a lot between here and Penal because my parents live in Penal and we’ve just tried to cut that down really, we don’t use it unless we have to because of the cost, we try to fill it up once a month and leave it at that.  It’s ridiculous.
James: Yeah we think twice about journeys that we make really.  Trying to think that if we were travelling to Exeter to incorporate 2 or 3 things into that day rather than ‘we’ll go to the high street on Saturday and on Sunday we’ll go to B&Q’ we would do it all in the same day because of the cost of the journey.
Violet: Which is in fairness what the government want.
James: We’ve actually considered changing our vehicle because it’s very thirsty on fuel although we’ve gone against it now but the fuel cost certainly does make you think about travel quite a lot.
Violet: I’ve started driving more slowly when I go to Exeter and it does make a difference and I’ve noticed lots of other cars are now in the inside lane and not whipping down..
James: Have you? That’s interesting.
Violet: Yeah
James: And also I try to work form home as much as I can whereas sometimes I used to just go to Exeter for a couple of hours I don’t do that anymore.  On Saturday we filled up my car and to cost £55 and we drove from here to Exeter and then up to Weston Super Mare to see Mikes mum, by the time we got back it was down to half so that journey cost about £27 so we certainly think twice about doing that.
Violet: We priced up a journey we did just a day trip and it was £20 that we’d used in fuel...
Ross: Tomorrow to Birmingham it’s going to cost me I should think well over £50.  A sobering thought.
James: Because you used to go and pick up your mum didn’t you, bring her back down and she’d have lunch with us and take her back again and we’re now considering asking her to catch the train.
Mike: Or I do it in your car rather than mine.
Violet: Well we changed to a diesel this time last year and to fill it up it was £55, now it £80 in a year so I think that’s ridiculous.
Hazel: Train journeys are very expensive aren’t they?
Ross: That’s what I find craziest that if I look at going to London – like for my meeting next week - £170 for a return is a ludicrous amount of money I mean it should be cheaper to go by train, but even with the petrol costs its going to cost me £70 in petrol £10 to park £10 for the congestion charge and so on but its still under £100.
James: Yeah that’s a lot more isn’t it?  It’s not as if it was £10 or £20 difference.
Ross: And they should be encouraging us.
James: If it was a small amount of difference you’d think ‘oh I’ll sit on the train’ but for £70 you just…
Violet: And you’ve got the inconvenience of delays.
Ross: Well that’s right and if you go on a cheaper, you know if I do remember o book early enough or I know in advance enough for the meeting then you’re still stuck with the problem if you buy the cheaper one then you can’t leave London until after 7:30pm an this sort of thing, if I’d had a day of meetings I don’t really want to hang around until 7:30 to set off  for home, so the whole thing of inconvenience and cost and everything else and if you finish the meeting at 3:30 and you want to come home early you’ve got to pay a premium, they don’t seem to want the business it seems to me so I stick to the car.
Moderator: I see.  James you mentioned something living close to your work place so to say...
James: You couldn’t get any closer to be honest.
Moderator: Let me make it a general question for everybody, did the way you travel influence maybe the place you chose to live?
James: Yes definitely for me an my family we chose this town because it was close to the motorway for commuting to either Taunton or Exeter because when we moved here neither me or my husband were working so we wanted a lot of choice of work place so we picked this particular town because of its commutability really.  And going on about choosing where you work, where I work now was very very convenient to where I live so that helped me to decide that yes I would like to do that job because I would not need transport and its 5 minutes, well 2 minutes, from my door so yeah that does influence the decisions I think where you live or where you work.
Moderator: Sometimes it’s the other way round where people choose their place of living and then they have to consider certain means of transport, which way was it for you can you reconsider that?
Rebecca: We moved to Collumpton because it was close to the motorway and so easy to get to other places, because we used to live down near Bubby Tracey(?) and I ha a job at Newton Abbot and then my job was changing to Exeter at the same time as we were looking for another house so that’s really why we chose Collumpton and it s also so handy to get to see relatives who live relatively nearby but always further up.
Ross: Yes but it does just convenience access to the motorway.
Rebecca: It does make such a difference because we used to have a 20 minute drive to get onto the dual carriage way before and now its 5 minutes it does make it a lot more convenient.
Ross: Yeah we’re a good 3 quarters of an hour closer to everywhere we have to go to pretty much.
Violet: Mine was house prices we were in Penal with my parents and I moved 20 years ago to here, so it was the price of the houses were cheaper and I didn’t want to go too far away from Exeter so nothing to do with travel really.
Moderator: Hazel you have been living in Collumpton all the time?
Hazel: I was born in Collumpton, a long time ago
Moderator: Did you move into the town?
Hazel: No I went in the forces during the second world war and that’s the only time I’ve been away from home.
Moderator: So did you within the town or from one place to another?
Hazel: Well I moved in different houses in the town.  I was born outside of Colompton, about 2 an a half miles outside I live there as a child and then I lived in fore street in Colompton then station road and now I’m in Livermead in a warden bungalow.
Moderator: Ok so was your travel behaviour or your ability to use certain means of transport does this influence your decision to move or where you moved?
Hazel: No
Moderator: So was it the opposite way round that you have to...
Hazel: It really is a small town.  I could walk well; I walked miles in my young days.
Ross: Actually part of what influenced us choosing a house was how near it was to the shops, yeah the fact that we could walk out of the door and pick up milk and that sort of thing, whereas several of the places we looked at we discounted on the basis that we’d have to get in the car to drive to buy anything out in the villages with no shops and so on.
James: Because even I can walk to the shops from where we live.
Ross: Yes we’re now right in the centre.
Rebecca: Yeah that was a big thing for us the fact that we would only need to have one vehicle because my husband would take that to work and I had everything on my doorstep I had the schools I had the shops, you don’t actually have to go anywhere other than walking and then the vehicle would be home at the week ends and we could do our journeys together, but we didn’t want to have 2 cars and have, like you said if you lived in a village if my husband was taking a car to work I would need a car too for school journeys or shopping etc.
Moderator: Ok the next issue holiday travel, I want you to think about maybe how often do you go on holiday what are your preferred destinations and how do you get there?  Ross.
Ross: At the moment we are dictated as much as anything by the dog who is getting fairly elderly and we feel we shouldn’t leave him, so we go by car and it happens it works well for Rebecca and it works you know, so at the moment if we can drive there and we’ve got, the dog is going through getting a passport so we ca actually leave the country with him, but even before we tended to mostly drive.
Moderator: So I guess it is not to the Bahamas?
Ross: We’re working on that.  But we’ve tended to go over to northern Spain or over to Holland because Rebecca’s got family over there but we’ve ended to do it by car regardless.
Rebecca: We went to Norway by car
Ross: We did indeed, drove up to Newcastle and across on the car ferry so yeah our preferred method is ultimately the car albeit that we may need a boat to get s across the water.
Moderator: I see what about your holiday travel James
James: Well my family we’re very big ‘caravanners’ so we pop away for lots of weekends and obviously we need the car to tow the caravan so car does the majority of our holidays, although we have had one holiday this year where we went on an aeroplane to France and that again was timescale it was a week holiday so we needed to get there quickly, if we’d have had a longer holiday we probably would have driven you see more sights if you drive through a country but yeah the car is our vehicle for holidaying in.
Moderator: Ok.  Violet is different for you?
Violet: Well 14 years car to Cornwall with a tent, but we’re getting a caravan now so, and we’ve had one holiday to Florida in the last 10 years.
Moderator: So you’re not really a frequent flyer?
Violet: No I wish I could.
Moderator: Hazel do you sometimes travel?
Hazel: Well I don’t go on holidays to stay I go on coach day trips, I used to take coach holidays mostly in Britain I have been to Brittany and Jersey but not any further away but normally I’m better at home.
Moderator: So you make people visit you instead
Hazel: I go on trip within a coach party, day trips.
Moderator: Ok thanks a lot.  One additional question is do you think your holiday travel behaviour changed within the last couple of years if you can reconsider that?
Rebecca: Well it has for me but because of personal circumstances really, it has become very difficult to go on a plane and get up the steps and things like that, and in fact just lately I haven’t really even wanted to go out of Devon.  We’ve had holidays virtually on our doorstep going to stay in a nice hotel but you know once it was literally half an hour away.
Ross: It’s terrific it’s a great idea for holidays.
Rebecca: Because if you know what’s round about you feel don’t have to do anything you can just sit and relax we did it once and we liked it so.
James: But we live in a holiday county don’t we.
Rebecca: Yes it’s so beautiful round here.
Ross: There are parts of it which we didn’t know all, we were aware of Virginstow and so on; it’s extraordinary we hadn’t seen any of it before.
James: That’s what we found with the caravanning sometimes we may only go an hour or 2 hours but they’re just too far to go for day trips so we go for a weekend and explore that little area you know maybe only an hour away and it is the holiday county everyone comes here don’t they and we should explore closer to home without having to go for miles and miles.
Rebecca: And it’s so nice when you come back because you haven’t got a really long journey to face and you’re tired, I feel far more refreshed coming back from a stay that’s not been with a long journey.
Ross: I think certainly we’ve done a number of long weekends and they feel like you’ve been away for at least a week if not longer because you arrive almost instantly you know within an hour or so, I think they work well.
Rebecca: Costs more probably to stay in these expensive hotels than it would to go to the Bahamas.
Ross: Yes certainly Spain would be cheaper.
Moderator: Could be yeah.  Violet did something change for you over the last years?
Violet: We’ve done the same thing for 14 years, the same campsite; my kids just want to keep going back to the same campsite.  Actually that’s really travel as well actually because we go on the campsite and we’re on the dunes really just off the beach we know that if it’s a fortnight of beautiful weather - which we’ve had a lot of when we go away - we don’t have to leave the campsite, we don’t take the car we walked to the beach we stayed all day walked back, whereas in Newquay if you stay in on one of the other campsites you’ve got o take your car find space lug it all to the beach so we just stayed on the same campsite, actually this year is the first year we haven’t been we’re fed up the kids aren’t happy but we’re not going again we’re not actually going anywhere this year.
Moderator: Let me come back to one point when you are on holiday you walk a lot more.
Violet: Yes really
Moderator: Because it’s so convenient or so close?
Violet: Unless it, if it was a fortnight of nice weather we wouldn’t leave the campsite because the kids like the beach I like the beach so we wouldn’t leave the campsite really, but it’s just the weather that makes you get in a car and go somewhere else really.
Moderator: James you mentioned going to France.  Do you maybe travel differently when you are on holiday?
James: No.  When we’re on holiday we generally use a car, even though we used an aeroplane to get there we did hire a car at the final destination, and we were staying in a villa that was more or less in the country so to get anywhere you needed the car.  Although there were some bicycles at the villa we did do some bicycling for a change.
Moderator: Ross you said you often go by car to the places (holiday) I think you also use the car then or is it different? 
Ross: We’re largely taken by Rebecca’s mobility and the dog so…. The dog’s a major concern he’s doing very well actually.  The car is just convenience we can throw everything in and go, so holidays certainly it almost has to be the car I don’t thing we’d ever consider any alternative.  Business travel is different I occasionally look at other ways of doing things.
Rebecca: And also on holiday we park the car and set off to walk around a strange town if I got tired you could always go and fetch the car can’ you, that’s what is so lovely about it.  Its s bit like a comfort blanket isn’t it.
Moderator: Ok one last question regarding holiday travel.  Do you sometimes use low cost airlines?
James: Yeah when I went to France it was a low cost airline.
Moderator: So was it just because of the price?
James: Just for the price.  Although we did pick an airport convenient to here, we went from Exeter and I would always pay a little more to go from Exeter, because you were saying about only travelling short distances to go to London to get on an aeroplane to go a long way is horrendous, its not my idea of a holiday or a break so we would pay extra to fly form Exeter for the convenience and to shorten the journey not only for our sake but for the children as well because I just can’t imagine driving four hours to London and waiting another three hours in an airport and a journey an aeroplane as well just that wouldn’t be a holiday I’d rather not go!
Ross: If it counts I keep booking low cost airline flights for my mother.
Moderator: For which purpose?
Ross: My youngest brother lives in Spain and so she goes out to visit the grandchildren and she pops backwards and forwards several times a year because it is ludicrously cheap, she flies out of Bristol Airport and I can get her there and back usually for under £40 which is an awful lot cheaper than I can get to London for.  It is just incredibly cheap; I’ve just booked her out there for Jamestmas.
Violet: But there’s no reason to pay for a high cost flight I don’t think because if you’re doing a short journey into Europe you don’t need the meal that a lot of airlines are giving you a meal, you don’t need to have a meal for an hour and a half’s journey.  I was quite shocked at the other end when we got off the plane and the airport was a tin shack but we only picked up our baggage and left so it didn’t really matter presumably if we’d paid a bit more we’d have had a nicer building to arrive into.
Moderator: We are really fast I have to say.
James: Are we not doing enough talking?
Moderator: No no. I have to bring up one other issue we sometimes use the term sustainable does anybody know what that means and can you explain to me what it does mean?  I’ll explain later.
Violet: We could have a guess I suppose.
Hazel: Xxxxxxxx00:34:21
James: Walking is sustainable.
Rebecca: Yes it certainly is.
Ross: Not dependent on things that/fuel that is going to run out.
James: Solar powered cars?
Moderator: For instance.
Violet: Powered on chip fat.
Rebecca: Are we heading in the right direction?
Moderator : Definitely you are, I mean sustainability is a concept, just to explain you something, that deals with environmental issues so its about environmentally friendly modes of transport and the main idea is to lets say keep the world for future generations so that they can also live their way of life and also lets say travel.  So we have mainly environmental aspect and some social aspects and financial aspects, economic aspects.  I want to ask if you for yourself think you personally travel more or less sustainable or environmentally friendly to keep it simple?
Rebecca: I definitely don’t because I use the car for everyday, I mean even to come here from Church Street we’ve driven.  I would like to be more environmentally friendly but it is just difficult really.
Ross: They don’t make the effort do they?  It has been possible to run a car on water for 20 years 25 30, I don’t know.  It’s not in the government’s interest nor in the petrol companies nor in the car companies.  When we start really running out there are plenty of alternatives we could run cars on just about anything chip fat water all of those are technologically possible now and if they were mass producing it would be cheaper but they choose not to.
Rebecca: I think that’s one of the good things about petrol going up in price, it is making people think about journeys they take.
Ross: And it will force the manufacturers eventually to use more fuel efficient cars and whatever.
James: I don’t think people are thinking about their journeys because of the environment though, they’re thinking about their journeys because they can’t afford to do the journeys.
Rebecca: But the knock on effect is good for the environment.
Moderator: Violet what do you think?
Violet: Well I walk a lot, in a week I walk everywhere.  Some people will take the car up to the, down to Somerfield, I’ll walk there and walk everywhere I suppose its only week ends if I go further that I take he car really, I don’t think cars are very friendly.
James: I don’t think people can afford to be environmentally friendly; the choices aren’t there within a normal family’s budget.  There are diesel cars or petrol cars like you were saying here are other forms but they’re not affordable to he normal household really, there are gas converted car aren’t there they’re starting to come in but they’re not affordable to the normal household really.  A lot of transport does come down tom finance.
Rebecca: It’s probably what we’re used to as well though isn’t it because I mean when I was young I used to walk to school and always catch the bus and so did everyone else in my family because we didn’t have a car, as son as we got the car we did everything in the car and have just got into that habit now even though now I have to use the car I probably would use I anyway because it is habit.
Ross: It’s there it’s convenient
Hazel: There’s too many cars. I’ve walked to school 2 and a half miles in and home and it was very unusual to see a car at all, even the doctor had a horse and trap.
Ross: That sounds very civilized can we go back to that?
Violet: Well the kids can’t walk to school five minutes now their mothers are dropping them off I a car.
Rebecca: Yeah that’s the other thing no-one ever picked us up from school we just used to walk home.
James: Well yes that’s the change in society isn’t it children would walk home on their own whereas now mum’s don’t feel it’s safe for a child to walk on their own so they go to collect them.
Ross: I keep hearing statistically there is absolutely no increase in child abductions ……00:39:41
James: No it’s just in the papers more when it does happen.
Ross: But I agree, when I had my kids going to school I used to take them and pick them up yet they were only a mile away less than that, but I used to walk or cycle 4 or 5 miles to school.  So we have become more protective or cautious.
James: But also the dangers of children walking home is because the roads have got busier, its not only abduction that parents think about it’s the fact that the child may have to cross a busy road with so much traffic on the road you’re conscious of a child not paying attention slipping off a pavement crossing without looking.
Violet: Because there’s a Zebra crossing down by the ‘comp’ (comprehensive school) and apparently not even the teachers stop to let the kids cross so it’s not safe anyway.
James: It is a catch 22 really.
Moderator: Hazel you probably travel more or less environmentally friendly.
Hazel: I’ve got a four wheeler walking aid...00:41:00 x x x
Moderator: That’s sustainable.
Hazel: It keeps me on my legs you know.
Moderator: Do you think there’s a need for more environmentally friendly transport of travel behaviour in general?
Hazel: Well there is really but some say we should have the railway doing more heavy goods and all that but they don’t use the railways as much nowadays do they?  Otherwise the only alternative, I men you said about water but if it was water it would be steam wouldn’t it? 
Ross: No they can extract hydrogen from water and run a combustion engine.
Rebecca: That’s alright until we get these droughts, but not this year.
Ross: Water could become as expensive as 0:41:53 again.
Violet: Anything we use all the time they just put the price up. 
Ross: Yes they’re not stupid are they?
Violet: No they’re not look at diesel, diesel was cheaper, now all of a sudden everybody’s got diesel cars and it’s dearer than petrol.
Hazel: Of course people travel more now don’t they?  They move around more, I mean Collumpton was a compact little town you could get everything you need you didn’t need to go to Exeter, we were more neighbourly I think and everything in the old days.
Ross: Yes distributed family and as you said less shops less choice in the average high street.
Hazel: All the supermarkets have spoiled all the little towns.  I mean I’m the fourth generation Collumpton.
Moderator: Maybe a general question.  What would be necessary to attract you in person to change your travel behaviour to what is a more sustainable or environmentally friendly mode?
Ross: Price.  I’d go to London by train and if they halved the price, if they made it cheaper for me to go by train than by car or I suppose conversely if the cist of going by car went up enough I’d switch to train maybe, but it would have to be a substantial difference because the train is less convenient.  Price certainly would be a major factor, I’d love to do it on environmental reasons but practicality and cost are always going to be the major concern I think.
James: Yeah I’d use the bus to go to Exeter more if it was more financially viable.  For one person to go on the bus you could say yes it is cheaper to go because of the cost of fuel and the cost of the car park but if I add in just one child you’re bringing the cost about the same, if you add in a second child it dearer to go on the bus.  I don’t dislike bus travel its just the fact of the cost of it sometimes, and in this town the train line does run right through but it doesn’t stop, I think you were saying Hazel 00:44:24 x x x x.   If they were to bring the station back into Collumpton I wouldn’t know how much it would cost on the train but that would be a nice way to travel to either Taunton or Exeter because it would be quite quick wouldn’t it?  And I would consider that if it was to stop in Collumpton.
Hazel: In my young days to go to Exeter on a train cost 9 pence in the old money.
Ross: Mind you, I’ve just booked for my aunt to come down from Newcastle to my mother’s in Western Super Mare; twenty four pounds each way on the train which is terrific it’s a good service and so on it’s a straight through train. 
James: I think you can et cheaper travel by booking in advance.
Ross: You can if you can work your way through the system.  I’m told they have simplified it but I tried about a month ago I suppose and I phoned up train enquiries having looked on the internet and I couldn’t  work out, I spent my life on the internet and I couldn’t work out what their prices were so  phoned up and general rail enquiries said ‘yep you can do for £12’ I said ‘wow that sounds good I’ll have some of that’ and they said ‘well even if none of those are available because they’re limited you should be able to do it for £70’, I said ‘well ok that sounds viable’ so they said ‘I’ll put you through to Great Western to book you ticket’ I went through to them and repeated to them what I wanted and they said ‘£170’ and I said ‘well what happened to the £12 one’? ‘Ah well there’s only a few of those and you have to book well in advance and we sell out very quickly’ and I said ‘what happened to the £70 one’? ‘Ah well you can’t do that if you want to be in London before 10:30 in the morning’.  Fine, you give up.  But yeah I think if you can book far enough in advance and you can fit with what they want then it can obviously be cheaper.
Moderator: Violet
Violet: I’m afraid mine will be car or motor bike, I hate busses I hate trains.
Moderator: Nothing to change?
Violet: No no way.  We went from Tiverton to St Ives one summer with the kids to give them the experience of going on the train, we left at 9:00am and by the time we got to St Ives we had half an hour before we had to go back on the last train.  All day on the train, the kids thought it was fantastic the food place was shut you couldn’t get a drink for the kids; and we just thought never, never again.
Ross: That’s tragic isn’t it?
Violet: I like my car I can go when I want can come back when I want.
Moderator: I want to mention some measures related to, meant to be to force people to use more environmentally friendly transport.  What do you think about road pricing or congestion charging in London, what do you think about these measures?
Rebecca: We get it free, w don’t have to pay.
Ross: Well I don’t have to if I’m with you.
Rebecca: My car’s registered so we don’t have to.
Moderator: What do you think in general about these things?
Rebecca: I think it’s a good idea but then it doesn’t really affect me because I don’t have to pay.  I guess if I lived in London I might have a stronger view about it but I think there have got to be some sort of measures because we can just have our cities gridlocked all the time so they tried that way and I think it seems to work, but I know people in London do say its really expensive for them but I think we can’t have it both ways we can’t have the convenience of using our cars everywhere but expect not to have to pay a price for that.
Violet: Perhaps they ought to bring the car tax if they’re going to do congestion (charging) bring the car tax down so then it’s only people actually using where the congestion is because its like you’re paying twice.  Your car tax is to stick it on the road isn’t it and then you’re paying again.
Ross: It’s not an either or its both isn’t it.
Violet: Yes and they’re on about doing it locally some sort of payment on roads and we thought oh brilliant because we’ve been travelling around all the back lanes.  So we would probably gain if they bring the tax down and perhaps do that we might gain a little bit.
James: I don’t think congestion charges stops people from using those areas because they have got to haven’t they?  I think if you’ve got to do the journey you’ll pay the cost to do it. Like you were saying you have to do a meeting in London you’ve got to get there so you’ve got to pay the congestion charge.
Ross: I guess when I was commuting into London the congestion charge might have pushed me onto the train.  I think if you’re doing it every day and looking at £10 every time you went in, and you were doing it 5 times you know £50 a week on top of petrol and parking would make a difference.
Violet: The people in shops their because of the congestion charge and their deliveries they’ve put up the prices in the shop because of the congestion charge.
James: I think park and ride at cities is a good idea you now when people park their cars outside ad take a bus in to avoid too many cars in the city centres.  I personally haven’t used it before and I don’t now the cost of it either but... 
Ross: Its usually free to park and maybe a nominal charge.
Violet: I done it once in Exeter at Christmas, and never again.  It was really expensive we couldn’t believe the price and they took us all the way round the outside of Exeter to get into Exeter, and I thought no.
Ross: It’s a waste of time.
James: And you do have this thing if you’re going for a serious shopping day are you going to end up with too many bags that you can’t carry back on the bus to the park and ride and you think; should I just take my car and pay the parking fee, I can unload half way through my shopping day then go back out shopping again.
Violet: And the parking fees aren’t bad in Exeter.  If you park in the right place which we’ve found it’s a quick walk, it’s always empty and we park there and walk, my mum moans sometimes but it’s...
James: But my parents live in the country so they have to use their car to go to any major town, and they’re pensioners now and they’ve got their free bus passes which they say they would like to us but they would always need their car to get to a bus station anyway, and a friend was telling my mum that when you went to Barnstable why did you and park in town why didn’t you park at the park and ride because you’ve got your bus pass now its free, so she actually did that and she said it was quite a good way for her because she avoided, I think you’re right the car park at the outside of town is free and then you pay to go on the bus, well because she had a bus pass she didn’t have to pay, and I think the bus passes for the pensioners has probably given them freedom to travel more and I expect they use the busses more.  I know somebody in Collumpton and they both drive a car but they’re using their retirement to explore Devon on the busses because like I said earlier if you’re on the bus you can see the scenery more especially if you went on the top of a double-decker, I quite like going through little towns and villages nosing into peoples gardens.
Violet: If you’re not in a hurry and it’s just a leisure trip that’s lovely.
James: That’s right they’re pensioners and they’ve got time on their hands, I think for younger people families working people time is a big issue and you can’t afford the time to do these more environmentally friendly forms of transport.
Ross: But the road pricing it does seem to me it is another stealth tax isn’t it, because the more you drive the more you pay in duty on petrol you pay road tax you pay VAT on the car and all the rest of it and yet again they’re going to stick yet another bill on often when you really have no choice.  That’s the failure it’s, I think in London it is legitimate where they’re saying we’ll improve the public transport and they’re doing it and then they brought in the congestion charge because there really is an alternative, you can use busses they have bus lanes so the busses actually do get through and so on but I think there is a huge danger that they just bring in road pricing and you have no choice but to pay it.  If I want to go to Birmingham there really isn’t a viable alternative, if I want to go to Wells for example or almost anywhere relatively locally within 40 or 50 miles; to do it by public transport it’s just a nightmare 3 changes on a train or several changes on a bus and no guarantee that the busses will run you really can’t do it, so it’s just another tax in that case.
James: Is London the only city that’s doing congestion charges in or are there others?
Ross: It is at the moment.  They’re talking about bringing it in in Manchester where they’re trying to, well the proposal is to do it slightly differently where they will charge depending on what time you go in on different rates.
Rebecca: Aren’t they thinking of it in Oxford as well?
Ross: Yes I think they are there are various schemes being proposed and of course London’s talking about putting their congestion charges up.
Rebecca: So it’s really the very big cities they’re doing it in isn’t it.
Ross: Yes but if it really works I guess they’ll do it elsewhere, I don’t know.
Violet: I think they should do it in Collumpton for big lorries and things and get them down fore street.
Moderator: You already mentioned some measures like park and ride and things that try to force people to change their travel behaviour, what do you in general think of the efforts made by the central and local government to encourage people to change their travel habits?
Ross: What efforts?
Rebecca: Yeah we haven’t noticed any.
James: Well they’re bringing out different tax brackets for different vehicles aren’t they (road tax brackets) to do with the emissions I guess but I’m not really sure.
Moderator: Do you think it’s a good idea?
James: Actually no because I have a higher rate vehicle, I could e in the higher tax bracket because we’re caravaners so we need to have a, well its best to have a 4x4 vehicle to tow a caravan especially as we like to rally in farmers fields and you know you need that kind of vehicle. So we are stuck in a situation that we’re using an older vehicle because its fallen outside the higher tax bracket, if we wee to move to a newer vehicle it would be a dearer road tax for us and its something we’ve spent a lot of time thinking about just recently; can we afford to pay a higher road tax, should we use our 4x4 only for caravanning and buy a second vehicle for running around in which case we would have 2 and we just cannot decide which is the best way to go; to have one vehicle that gives outs a lot of emissions I guess and pay a higher level of road tax or change to more economical vehicle and leave one stood up for most of the week or half of the year.
Ross: I wonder if they’ve really done the full sums.  Because if you use a smaller vehicle and you’re towing your caravan your vehicle will wear out quicker and therefore become scrap quicker so you then got to process it..
Violet: I think they’re doing a u-turn, someone said they are changing their minds about the car tax but I don’t know if they are.
Ross: They’d get such a riot. It’s not a vote winner is it?
James: Obviously there are lots of stories about women in the big inner cities using big 4x4 vehicles to drive their child to school, and yes there should be something done to avoid that possibly but then it’s the people like us who are using the vehicle for its purpose that are going to have to pay for that.
Ross: But to some extent if you drive a car with a big engine you pay more already because you pay it through the petrol, I mean if you’re only getting 10 or 15 miles to the gallon you’re paying through the nose for it.
James: So again you’re being double taxed like you were saying before, you are being penalised twice for the fuel and the road tax.
Ross: On the whole its, those who can afford it will continue to afford it they will have a 4x4 to take the kids to school and what you’re really penalising as you say is the people who really need a 4x4 because they tow caravans or because it’s a working vehicle and they’re the ones who it hurts, the rich they will continue to pay.
James: They will just continue to pay.
Ross: Absolutely because as a proportion of their expenditure it’s not a big element.
James: Everything should be income related.
Moderator: I want to mention a couple of things and you can tell me if you’ve ever heard about that, if not it is really ok.  Have you ever heard of things like green travel plans or green travel week or something like that?
Violet: Isn’t that like car share?
Yam: It’s an additional thing yeah.
James: At school they all have a walk to school week and the children are all really really encouraged to walk to school for that week and you will see a huge increase in them walking because they get some kind of reward at the end, they get a sticker every day they come in and I don’t actually know what the reward is by the end of the week but they get posters everything. Because it’s drilled into them at school they go home to mum and say ‘we’ve got to walk to school this week’, and I do know parents who live two miles out of town who actually make the effort that week to let their children walk to school or if not walk all the way they pick them up half way - perhaps they’ll meet them in the town car park rather than at the school gates.  So perhaps that might be something about green travel I don’t know.
Moderator: Violet you mentioned car sharing schemes
Violet: My son he got a job at Wooland and he’s not passed his car test yet, and he went on the internet to try to get someone to car share or he pay, nothing came back he didn’t get a match or anything.  Apparently there’s more people taking it up now in Devon and its doing really well but he just couldn’t get a match for Wooland, he started work there and he has now lots of people pick him up there’s different people but he couldn’t actually get a match on the internet.
James: When you drive into a town you often see the posters up on the lamp posts; car share and whatever, but as I don’t use a vehicle to travel to work its not something I’ve ever got involved in.  You’d like to think that people who are driving to Exeter to work do look into that to see if the person 3 doors down is travelling to the same company that they’re travelling to or something, I would like to think they are doing that.
Ross: And certainly the school runs you would hope that there are pools for people.
Rebecca: I do look sometimes you know, obviously I’m in the car on my own but car after car is going by and its just got one person in it.  Even if I go the Broadclist way obviously everyone’s going to Exeter that way and we’re all there one vehicle one person.
James: But then again that’s probably all down to convenience because perhaps if you start work at 9 and your neighbour starts work at 10 nobody’s going to give way and they’ll...
Rebecca: If you have to stay late one evening or something like that unavoidable circumstances you’re holding up the person.
Violet: And they might not turn up in the morning to get you.
Moderator: Ok one last question regarding sustainable or environmentally friendly travel.  Do you think these measures to force people to change their travel behaviour should also include holiday travel, or would it be possible to change people’s holiday travel lets say ask them to travel less or choose different destinations? What do you think?
James: I think if I was to consider perhaps using a bus to get my holiday destination I would probably still end up hiring a car when I got there because unlike Violet I don’t stay on a campsite all week I like to explore, and you might want to explore 2 miles down the road or 10 miles down the road and time of the day you, depending on the weather you’d stay a long time or a short time so.
Violet: I wouldn’t go without the car, I couldn’t not go anywhere.
James: I think if you are going on, well wherever I go on holiday I want to explore that area so I would always want to have a vehicle at my disposal really.
Ross: The last time I did a holiday where I didn’t hire a car I spent a week in southern Italy and it was phenomenal, they had a terrific system of busses which did the loop on the main roads and then when you go out on the edge of the town they then had little shuttle busses - which seemed to run every 5 minutes – going in and around the centre of the town, so you had the equivalent of coaches if you like which took you on the main journey.  I had a very good week I was touring round and I explored and stayed in a different place every night it was terrific.  I haven’t done it since and that was I don’t know 30 years ago I guess so a long time ago.
Rebecca:  I think people are thinking more about the cost of a flight, and you can offset it cant you in various ways which probably don’t really offset it, but I think people are feeling a bit more guilty about what it costs in terms of the fuel and everything and environmental costs of flights. And even though we have chose just to have little local holidays - I actually feel quite good about that, that we haven’t flown anywhere.  Usually if we go to Holland we don’t fly, I think we’ve flown once just because more convenient to go in the car, but I think I’d definitely think twice about a long haul flight I’d rather go on a boat.
Ross: And they’re fairly good
James: Yeah what is the best way to travel environmentally?
Ross: Its hugely difficult to work out, and even the government doesn’t seem to be able to work it out because they still keep talking about taxing individuals flights on the ticket price as opposed to taxing the plane, so the pane fly’s with 10 people on it they’re picking up the tax on 10 people as opposed to taxing the plane which would save, the people would schedule to make it only fly when its full or whatever which seems entirely illogical,  But they keep looking at you know, no we’re going to put a tax on a fuel surcharge on we’re going to put a tax on the individuals tickets and so on.
James: Yes I was surprised when I did this recent plane journey that there were empty seats on the plane, because that’s the first time I’ve been on an aeroplane with empty seats and that was a cheap airline. So they are flying under capacity.
Ross: Whereas yes I mean really the Easyjet thing of you know you should be ‘it’s better to sell the tickets at £2 rather than have it fly empty but yeah.
James: And you assume that a train journey is more environmentally friendly than a car journey because there’s more people on it, but how much is a train giving I really don’t know the facts and figures for that. 
Ross: Facts about your carbon footprint I think are still quite hard to come by, and agreement on what is the most environmentally friendly way to travel or to do things, I think it’s still quite hard.  I was listening to a radio programme the other day were they were talking about green food and so on and by time you put in the travel for the food and all these other things and the carbon emissions from the ploughing of the ground, you know they were saying even the scientists can’t actually work it out so how can a poor consumer.
James: Well this is it you think oh well should I go on the bus to Exeter  but is that the best choice the busses are running quite regularly but they’re never full so that surely is damaging the environment more because five people on the bus that’s giving out..
Violet: A huge double-decker that goes up through the housing estate which it shouldn’t be, really it should never be going up round by the manor there and round by the back it’s ridiculous.
Rebecca: I think the subject has been raised, people are thinking about it more that a few years ago wouldn’t have given a second thought about going on a plane it was just a way to get on holiday, but now I would.  And like in the paper the other Saturday there was a whole pull out supplement on holidays you could do without using a plane.
Hazel: Well really and truly we cause all the 1:08:45 xxxx by our travel.  In my day we didn’t go on holidays you couldn’t afford a new 1:08:56 xxxx.
Moderator: Thank you very much.  The last point I want to ask you some questions about is sustainable or let’s say environmentally friendly behaviour at home, so I want to ask you what do you do at home to behave more environmentally friendly?
James: Recycling.
Rebecca: Don’t leave the tele on standby.
Violet: We’re watching all the electric at the minute but its not because environmental its because of the electric, so the kids are being shouted at for leaving the lights on and I’ve stopped using my dishwasher - I get to use it once every week once a month I’ve been using it lately I sued it Sunday it was such a joy.  So I got the kids involved what you’ve got a dishwasher why are we doing it?  But the electric’s gone up so high that we’re just all taking it in turns - they’re taking it in turns helping me because it is always me but they’re taking it in turns.
James: I was just thinking about how you’re supposed to be environmentally friendly with water and there’s two ways of looking at it really; if you put yourself on a meter you would use less water which would help the environment but I’ve looked into being changed to a meter and it would probably cost me as much if not more as a family to go onto a meter, and without being on a meter my water charges are so high my theory now I if I’m paying that much I’m going to use it.  So I don’t watch my consumption of water because I’m paying an awful lot for it regardless of what I use, so I will have a bath if I want to have a bath and if I want clean for the next person in the house then we’ll have it.  But I think the biggest thing I do in my house is recycling, which the council helped us to do they brought in the measures to separate everything and they brought in the measures for collecting it which at the beginning was a pain you think why should we do this we pay our council charges and whatever, but I think its been a good step forward and I’m quite used to doing it now I’m quite happy to do that because we were given the help to get it going and the facility of it being collected from the doorstep.
Rebecca: It would be nice if we could recycle more.
James: Yes there are some items that this town isn’t doing yet aren’t there.  Yes you’re right there could be more.
Moderator: Hazel do you do these things?
Hazel: Yes I recycle everything I can.  Of course when you think of it we caused all that with all our wrapping and plastic.
James: It’s all self inflicted.
Ross: I do think the people who have got the time and the nerve to unwrap everything at the supermarket and leave all the packaging, because we try not to shop very much at supermarkets at all for all sorts of reasons but part of it is just the sheer volume of packaging its just out of hand. And hand up I’m I the marketing business so I understand about packaging but it really has got totally ridiculous, why they can’t use biodegradable materials for packaging I’ve no idea I don’t understand at all.
Rebecca: We always try and take shopping baskets with us and don’t use...
Ross: I feel a criminal coming out with all those…
Violet: We do a months shop, we do a month and they’re going on about not using carrier bags well what are w going to do we’ve got 3 trolleys.  I’m collecting bags you buying the bags you keep using but I put them in the car and forget to take them in!
Ross: That’s a problem.
James: I think that is something that is coming in and eventually we’ll all get used to it, carrier bags have been so convenient.
Ross: But they’ve become a criminal activity haven’t they?
Violet: See the recycling people wont take, I haven’t got the boxes because you’d have to have 4 because they’ll only take it if its sorted, you’ve got to have tins in one milk bottles in the other if you put one thing in the wrong box they put a sticker on it saying we’re not taking it. So I put mine in carrier bags
Ross: And they will recycle the carrier bags wont they.
Violet: I just have to leave a note ‘please leave my carrier bags I’ll use them again’.
Moderator: I see.  So Violet for you if it would be more convenient would it be easier to do these things or because you said you have to separate everything?
Violet: I don’t mind doing at all I put them in carrier bags and put them out on the grass, but I used to have the black boxes but I haven’t got the room in the garden for the boxes it would have to be 4 and I just haven’t got the room so I do it in the bags because I used to get snotty notes that there’s a newspaper in with the tins.  You I’ve got children that take that out for me put it in the right box because they don’t do they just put in any box so then you get a note like that and then you think why do I bother? Can’t they take the newspaper out?  I mean they’re getting paid they’re doing a job you’d think they’d take one newspaper out and put that in the right box.
James: But at the moment it’s a fortnightly collection, if it was a weekly collection you’d have more room at home to store your recyclable rubbish.
Violet: Yes I don’t know if I’ve actually got enough in a week but.
James: Well yeah you’re saying if it builds up over two weeks you haven’t got room in the garden to store your boxes and things, weekly collection probably would help some people but not necessarily all people.
Moderator: In general do you think that, we mentioned a lot of things; recycling saving energy maybe saving water if you’re on a meter, do you think it is good or it is necessary to do these things in these days?
James: I think it’s necessary to recycle your rubbish because of the land fill situation.  I think its appalling when you see these land dumps and there’s just rubbish everywhere.
Ross: I was staggered when we were moving house and were taking stuff down to the municipal tip down at Newton Abbot and I did a run the day before we moved, first thing in the morning, threw my couple of black plastic bags into there, went back down there mid afternoon and to see the sheer amount of stuff which was going into the land fill bit not the recycling bit so there are plastic bags and, and it was a mountain of stuff it was a house size chunk.  And you think that one relatively small town and that’s just the stuff that’s been taken to the tip it not what’s collected and it’s just horrific the sheer volume.
James: But living on an island we’re going to run out of space aren’t we.  Its not as if we live on a huge continent with unpopulated areas that you can just take it to and dump it, it’s quite a highly populated area really.
Ross: We’re going to have to find better ways of getting rid of stuff, or make more of it recyclable.
Hazel: All these plastics they’re not going. In my day you burnt all your rubbish you didn’t all the…
Ross: Yep and you’d put stuff in paper bags and what have you, much better yeah.
Violet: Primark have paper bags, they’re not very good but, they break by the tie you’ve got to the bottom of town.
Moderator: Ok thank you very much I think we have more or less five minutes left.  Last thing I want to ask you is could you answer four more questions on these sheets hopefully its ok for you, and do you have enough, oh sorry they’re mine.  And than you very much I think for me at least it was a really interesting discussion maybe you enjoyed it a little bit too?