Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: OK.  Let’s begin.  Welcome everybody, it’s nice to have you here, it’s really appreciated that you can contribute to our project.  It was maybe told to you that we have a so called Travel Behaviour survey, you know we ask people from Exeter what means of transport they use, about their opinions regarding certain things related to transport and, yes it’s maybe also was it plain to you, it is a relatively relaxed discussion, everybody is free to say whatever you want.  There is no wrong or right and it’s not a test for you or something like that.  It’s just to hear what you think and how do you behave transportly related and, it’s during the couple of days we hold these meetings, and it was always interesting experience for everybody, so maybe it will also be interesting for you.  I just, one thing, you don’t have to be concerned about the recording it’s in no way related to your name or your address or whatever, you have strong data protection rules and no-one can track it back to you.  It is absolutely safe and this will only be stored as long as we need it to extract our, hopefully useful thoughts and comments, so don’t be afraid.  The one thing I wanted to ask you, it is approximately a 90 minutes meeting, sometimes a little bit less, sometimes a little bit more but not much because I’m already scheduled for the next meeting for the following hours and you don’t have to be concerned that we will, that it will take much longer.  The only thing I also want to mention is please let one person at a time speak because it’s better for the recording and it’s also nicer to you when somebody has to say something and just wait until they’ve finished and if you want to add something just feel free to step up and go ahead.    The first thing I wanted to ask you is a short introduction round, my name is Moderator and I am a researcher here at Exeter University and the department of Geography, I am a Service A travel behaviour researcher and we are having this project, it started in January, it’s a 2 year project and the main aim is to figure out how people think about transport, how they behave, and if we can get extract some interesting things regarding potential measures to help people that are transportly related, so I would maybe ask you to start with a short introduction, maybe your name and, you don’t have to say your full name if you don’t want to.  Name and what’s your status.
John: I’m John, from the Kings Heath area, that’s it isn’t it.
Moderator: OK.  What are you doing at the moment?
John: I’m retired.  
Moderator: OK. 
Mary: I’m Mary also from the Kings Heath area.  I’m retired.  
Moderator: OK.  
Bill: Bill, and I’m retired.  I’m from Livermore area.
Moderator: OK.  
Tony: I’m Tony, I’m from Kings Heath area as well.  I’m not retired yet unfortunately!  I’m at an FE college.  And I generally drive a car quite a lot.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks.
Sheila: Hi I’m Sheila, I’m also from the Middlemoor area, I have to admit up until recently I used a car all of the time, but I do try and use the bus but I would say perhaps not successfully.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks.  
Sandra: Hi I’m Sandra, I live out at Digby as well, and I’m a teacher but not at the moment.
Moderator: OK.  I know how it feels, yes.  Thank you very much.  The first thing I wanted to ask you just to fill out briefly, it’s really not something you have to think about very much, just if you could fill in these forms about your travel behaviour in general.  We have one, two, three, four, five different travel purposes and you, if you just could name your preferred mode and what you normally use and if, sorry I forgot, you need one too?  And if you can think about an alternative, if you don’t have an alternative to the mode you use then just leave it out.  (sorry what was your first name?)
Sandra: Sandra.
Gentleman: (5:30)  Unknown comment
Mary: Yes that’s a bit difficult that one isn’t it?
Moderator: It’s not too difficult it’s just…
Mary: Could be everything!
Moderator: Yes sometimes, if it’s mixed then..
Mary: Depends when it is.  Yes.
Moderator: No that’s great.  We’ll talk about them later.  Definitely.
: 
: Hello we were invited to do a survey on the Challenge
Moderator: Come in.
New lady: Is it alright that I have children with me?
Moderator: Oh!  That’s great!
New man: Be alright if I come round is that OK?
Moderator: Yes come in.
New man: Are you sure?
Moderator: Yes.  As long as they’re not too loud!  Because we are taking a recording.
New lady: Yes – I’ll try to keep him happy with food.
Moderator: OK.  Hello.
: General settling down
New lady: Sorry we’re a bit late we got caught in the rain.
Moderator: If you want something to drink just feel free.
: Mumbling – settling and getting drinks!
: General mumbling discussion.
New lady: I thought there would be more people than this.
Moderator: Pardon
New lady: I thought it would be bigger than this.
Moderator: That’s Ok I think, it’s really nice.
New lady: I’ve never done anything like this before.
Moderator: It’s good for us.
: Getting drinks!!
Sandra: Where do I put it?
Moderator: Oh you can keep it for now.  Yes maybe I should just start and you can join us later.  Can I have your names please?  Only your first names.
James: 
Moderator: Do you know where you want to sit?  
Claire: 
Jenny: 
Moderator: Sorry for the delay, you just wrote down a couple of things and first question related to that is – which mode of transport do you usually use and are there major differences in the way you travel for different purposes?  Any who wants to go first?
Bill: I travel by car on the first one – leisure, theatre etc.   Shopping yes – car. I put bus down as well because it said Club, I didn’t put an H in front of it.
Moderator: OK
Bill: In case I go out one night nightclubbing!
Mary: In that case he gets a bus everyday!!
Moderator: So it really depends!  OK
Bill: Yes, trips, countryside and visiting family, I go to London – by car. I can’t walk very far so I’ve got to use a car.   Going on holiday definitely.
Tony: I use the car for most things, going to work and [10.25] to do bits and pieces, unfortunately! 
Moderator: I see. What about you Mary?
Mary: First choice – would always be the bus, locally.   Second choice – would be the train.  Anything long distance in this country would always be the train.  Obviously abroad would be plane, and there are things like ferries if you’re going to France or something like that.  But wherever we can we would always use public transport.  The car is always a secondary thing, so we get the car out of do we not.  It’s nearly always public transport.  
Moderator: OK
Bill: We haven’t got a lot of use for the car really.  About 5,000 miles a year which is nothing these days is it?  In fact for days on end it can be on the drive unused, it’s like Mary said, bus and train.  
Moderator: James is it different for you, or..
James: Yes I don’t drive at all.  I use the train a lot, if I don’t use the train I am cycling most places.  I do a lot of walking as well.  So it’s either the train which is cheapest really, because buses take too long, and are quite expensive really.  
Sandra: I use the train when I can, especially living at Digby because it’s so easy to walk to the train station.  And again like James it’s cheaper and it’s generally quicker and a bit more reliable than the buses, which doesn’t say an awful lot because the trains aren’t that great!  I use the car for work because getting to Star Cross which is where I teach is almost impossible, I can do it by train but you have to leave ridiculously early and when you have to carry lots of things for work it’s very difficult, so I do drive to work and if I was going to visit family and so on I would generally drive just because they live in fairly isolated locations that are difficult to get to as well.  But train if I can and bus as a fall back if the train doesn’t go to where I want to go.
Moderator: Thanks.  Sheila
Sheila: Right, most journeys of any length up until recently I would have used the car, I’m not averse to walking.  I have started to try to use the local bus system, but I find it a nightmare.  I’m waiting for a quarter of an hour for a bus and today’s a prime example, we were supposed to be here by quarter past four and we didn’t arrive until half past.  So it’s not the timing, they are not reliable.  And well, we all know it can be useful having our own transport, is you know, self evident.  I don’t use the train very much at all, if we are going long distances we usually go by train, sorry by car, and on the odd occasions when we haven’t gone by car we’ve gone by coach.  I don’t normally use the train.  And I think that’s primarily because it’s very expensive, it might be the shorter journeys might be cheaper by train, but long journeys to London, to Manchester, to Scotland whatever are very expensive.
Lady: Agreeing that the trains are expensive.
Sheila: That’s been my experience.
Tony: Definitely.  If you go into Digby it’s like a two day return into the city now which is brilliant, it’s really convenient and they do go relatively reliably, but if you want to get trains from Bristol, Exeter to Edinburgh, you’re talking about hundreds of pounds, you could drive there, actually you could buy a car!  And it’s just like, unless they make it a lot cheaper you will struggle to get people out of cars. 
James: I have family in Manchester and it’s like £180.
Tony: This is mad 
James: Like you can get the plane for like £49, it is a lot cheaper to drive as well.
Bill: You can get cheap train fares..
Female: You’ve got to book it two months ahead and you can’t normally do that..
Bill: A week, my son came down at the weekend, cost him £40 from London, Waterloo to St David’s – that’s return.
Female: That’s good.
Tony: That’s pretty good.
Female: That’s amazing.
Sheila: It’s to do with when you want to travel as well, isn’t it – that’s a lot of it.  It’s to do with cost is more at certain times of the week as well isn’t it, so you might choose, and if you were travelling at a cheaper time to travel by the train, but when it’s more expensive, peak times to travel by car.
Bill: If it’s an emergency you’ve had it.  You’ve just got to do at a high price. 
Sheila: You’ve got to do haven’t you?
John: Can I add something to that?
Moderator: Definitely.
John: I think I’m going to be the exception here.  Generally I would only speak well of the local bus service, and the local train service the D service.
Mary: Is that what you came in on?
Sheila: Yes
John: It’s great.
Mary: We use it all the time, we don’t have a problem.
John: I’m sorry recently it just isn’t the right one there, and I went mad, but that was only the once.  It’s pretty good, trains, Digby station, occasionally we don’t mind if something goes wrong, but usually it’s pretty good.  It’s the long distance train service that’s where you can sometimes have a problem.  But locally I think it’s great!  That’s why we don’t use the car. 
Sheila: The difficulty with the D bus also is the time when it stops in the evening, it is too early.
Mary: Yes that is a problem
Sheila: By, the last one’s at 7 o’clock, something like that so actually if you’re wanting to be in town for an evening it’s not suitable and you can get an H bus which takes you back up to Waterdore School which is still a bit of a walk, out to Digby.
James: Also doesn’t go on a Sunday does it?
Sandra: Yes that’s a big one as well
James: You’ve got to get a train.  And the trains as well doesn’t start running til about 5 past 11.
Sandra: And they are every hour then on Sundays.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks a lot.  So one of the main points is reliability, and convenience you mentioned, price maybe.  Are there other things, or is it different for you?  Bill, what do you like about certain means of transport and what you maybe don’t like?
Bill: Well I have always driven a car and I’ve been driving for 60 years now, I’ve had to get on the bus to go to the hospital because I go for treatment and I can’t drive afterwards.  So I’ve got to get the bus.  But there I stand and wait, then I’m on the phone saying I’m on the way, telling the hospital, I’m definitely on the way!  I get there, luckily they’re, they are held up themselves so I step in, but I’ve usually got to make an hour before to the appointment.
Sandra: I find the Park & Ride bus to the hospital is quite good.
: Yes.
Claire: Yes Excellent.
Sandra: I use that quite a lot coz when I had my surgery last year I had to go in two or three times a week, and that runs every 15 minutes.
Claire: Sometimes it’s 10 minutes.
Sandra: And it does turn up generally.  It’s pretty good.
Claire: Yes.  I use it sometimes just not to go to the hospital, to go into Heavitree and do some shopping as well, it’s just right by Heavitree in the shops there, so it’s really good and I can push the buggy on and off there.  So that is helpful.  
Sandra: It’s also cost, the cost is better, so it’s cheaper as well.
James: It doesn’t stop at all the bus stops.
Claire: Yes it just goes straight there and straight back, yes.  So it’s quicker, it only takes 10 minutes there and 10 minutes back.  
James: And it’s a pound return, so you can’t really grumble.
Claire: Yes you can’t really moan about that.
: Yes.
Bill: The bus is cheap for myself because I’ve got a pass.  
Claire: Er yes.  
: General agreement
Moderator: OK
Bill: I’d show you but my photographs bad!
: Laughter
Moderator: You don’t have to – It’s OK!  I want you to think about one thing – maybe we can consider, when did your travel mode, or your behaviour, travel behaviour in general last change?  And what were the reasons?  You can maybe thing about the last months or years, and if it doesn’t change, maybe further back.  I don’t know.
Mary: I think, consciously we made a decision to move from Honiton to Exeter, the family is in and around Exeter anyway and we were driving up and down the A30 a lot, and we thought by moving to Exeter we could use public transport which is what we do and where we’re all living really it’s only minutes to either the bus stop or the train station, or a park and ride.  And it’s since, it’s about 3 and a half years ago now, just over 3 years, that the poor old car just stands there and when we want to use it the battery’s usually flat!  We use it so infrequently, and it’s really for just the odd thing if you’re going to somewhere live Hotton Nurseries or you know somewhere out of town.  For the rest of the time, that’s why we use public transport, and that was a conscious decision and we reckon that the money that we saved from not travelling up and down the A30 actually pays our rates.  So you know there was a sort of big cost benefit there as well.  
John: We can’t do without the car entirely, like tonight we’re going to the cinema, it’s a bit difficult getting there, and impossible to get back if you didn’t have a car.  So it’s the last 5% of travelling we can’t do without the car for that, the other 95% I think we’ve got it covered at the moment haven’t we?
Mary: It’s a bit of a, it’s sometimes difficult to get your head around doing that change and using the car to using public transport and when you’re standing in the rain and it’s blowing a gale, and you’re frozen, you think what are we doing here we’ve got a car standing there doing nothing!  But if you can get over that, we just never think car first.  It’s always what time does the bus go, or what time’s the train?  So it’s a bit like giving up smoking, you’ve got to persevere and at some point you think oh this is fine, this is OK, we can do this you know.
Moderator: OK
James: Yes I’m quite lucky because I’ve never had a car, never drove, so I’ve always used like Public transport or my bike or, I’ve walked everywhere, but I think if I did have a car and I did drive to places like if it was blowing a gale, I don’t think I would go back to Public transport.
Mary: No you may not do,  no.
Sandra: (Agrees)  You’d just get used to what they have don’t they?
: Yes, I mean even driving has it’s frustrations I know, very occasionally the bus doesn’t turn up or it’s a few minutes late or whatever, but being in the car has it’s frustrations as well, and you know you’ve, if you’re used to doing it and you will see the great change over the years as we have..
Moderator: Bill do you agree?
Bill: I do agree, yes I, my top speed when I first learnt to drive the fastest we went was 45 miles an hour!  And you were courteous and what have you.  All gone.  All gone.  
Mary: Yes it’s quite scary sometimes…
Bill: I’m afraid the police in this area are about as useless as anything.  I went to Buckfast Tuesday, the Butterfly farm a day out, with the wife and going down I touched 70 a couple of times, but there were cars passing meat least 100 mile an hour, 4 by 4’s by the dozen.  They just don’t care.  And if you travel on the inside lane and try to get into the outside lane nobody, but nobody lets you out.  They just beep at you, flash at you, so when I do get out there I slow down to 60.  And slow them right up!  It’s the only way to do it.  
Moderator: I see.  
Bill: I say you can actually stop on a road if you put your warning signs on as long as you don’t go more than 20 minutes, the law states that a road can be closed for 20 minutes unofficially.  
Male: I didn’t know that.
Mary: I don’t think we all want to be doing that.
Bill: No!
: Laughter
Bill: Very naughty!
Moderator: Tony..
Bill: No it’s changed completely in as much that your journey time has changed, I used to travel from Southampton, when I lived in Southampton, I used to travel from Southampton to Brighton and the guys that were passing me I met when I got there.  And basically this is what is happening now, they’re going up the road, you’ll eventually catch them up, those that were breaking the law, no you don’t catch them, you can’t, it’s impossible.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks, Tony, something changed for you?
Tony: Yes well, while I was a student in Exeter sort of, two or three years ago, I didn’t have a car and walked everywhere sort of to University, either into town whatever, and because Exeter is not a massive place it’s not hard to, you can be in most places in like 20 minutes if you walk it at a brisk pace, nowadays since I’ve had a car I like to travel to like work and all the rest of it.  But then I lived in Bristol previously and getting from the centre of Bristol to where I lived on the outskirts, rush hour could take an hour and a half, whereas in Exeter I find that you are never in the car for more than like 20 minutes.  I can get from one side of town to the other, in little cut throughs and the rest of it, I’m not, I don’t think the traffic in Exeter, it can be round ex-bridges and that can be absolutely terrible, if you hit it at the wrong time of day then you could be sat there half an hour, 40 minutes, and be stuck there.  From my point of view I can get to where I want to be quickly enough that sort of, if I was for example if I was in Bristol I would get the train or bus probably more so than using the car.  Using the bus lanes you can get through sort of rush hour traffic quicker.  But in Exeter I find it’s not too bad.  I can get where I want to be quicker, but then, come September I’ll be commuting down to Cornwall two nights a week, so the only option I have there is really to use the car straight from work.  Commute down there.  So when I was a student I walked everywhere, but just having a car has just, means I just get places when I want to be able to do it and just the convenience of doing it.  If I have to be there, and I can lie in bed a little longer in the morning! 
Moderator: OK
Tony: I’m sorry!
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  OK.  I want to just mention something, maybe to Sheila, I don’t know, if you travel a lot by car does maybe, or did the rising petrol prices change something for you?
Sheila: No.  No it’s, no the change is not as recent as that.  No I just try to live as green as I can, I do cycle everywhere and I just thought you know, it’s ridiculous using the car all the time when you can get on a bus.  But as I say it’s really trying my patience, I’m not being very successful with it, I will persevere a little longer.  If it’s not a very long journey that I’m going to, or what would be a journey I walk, but I think the rise in fuel prices is going to have a big impact on the majority of people.  I mean even if they don’t have their own transport it’s, you know Public transport is obviously eventually going to get more expensive as well.  
Moderator: Bill?
Bill: Absolutely right yes.  Remember the days of ration, when you had petrol rationing, one was in the war and one was after the war when they, there was a strike of some sort anyway.. 
Female: Yes Suez Canal trouble.
Bill: You had to economise with your journeys, because you just couldn’t get petrol.  That’s if you were a person that had vouchers and that’s all you had.  If you were in business you could get vouchers on top of that.  So yes it does make a difference, and I’m going to say it is far better to ration it than it is to put the price up.  This is a farce at this pricing, specially that last garage in Exeter here, who put it up nearly £2 a litre now.  I think we’re in trouble.  The country’s in trouble, there’s no doubt about it, I had a guy at the door today trying to sell me some gas, cheaper than what I can get it, I said I don’t, I can’t be bothered any more with changing.  I’m fed up with it!  Oh you must be rich!  I said I might be!  So off he went, but it’s given me a tool to ring my supplier and say hey – I’ve been offered so and so.  Se what happens.  But no, price does, is really naughty because it’s going to affect an awful lot of people, it affects the price of food, straight away because road transport is used for shifting food all over the country.  When they take fish from Brixham to Grimsby it. You know what I mean, some of these things don’t make sense.  
Tony: With importing like 70% of our fish aren’t we?  At the end of the day we export 70% of our fish to other countries and we import 70% from elsewhere.  Likewise with strawberries, we’ve got strawberries in Devon and we export them, and we’re importing from Kent and all round the UK.
Female: Yes it’s ridiculous.
Sandra: There was a big fuss a while ago about I don’t know which company it was, exporting prawns I think was to somewhere in Asia to be treated and packed and then importing them back in again because it was actually cheaper for them to export them to transport them that far, halfway round the world and back again, than it was to pay the wages over here.  So, and that’s what it all comes back to, ultimately doesn’t it, all the things that we’ve been saying, there is so much that is tied up in costs, how much it costs to do things.  And ridiculous behaviours like that come out of that kind of thinking.  
Tony: But then again do the Government not tax, put like 70 pence on the tax on fuel anyway?  For the country [31.14] is 6p per litre.  And it costs like £4 to fill his car up.  It’s ludicrous isn’t it?
: Yes
Claire: That’s what puts us off getting a car, because it’s so expensive with the petrol and the insurance and absolutely everything it’s barely worth it, we live right next door to the train stop and we can get literally everywhere from going there, apart from the only thing I’m into gardening at the moment and I can’t get to like Garden Centres, but that’s a pain, but apart from that I can get to virtually everywhere, so don’t really think there is any point in getting a car at the minute really.  It would be too expensive.  
Sandra: I had a house mate who lived with me when I first bought my house at Clyst Heath, didn’t have a car and she worked at Middlemoor so she walked to work quite easily, she was a member of the Exeter co-cars scheme, I don’t know if anyone else has come across it?  So she had the ability to phone up and rent one of their cars whenever she needed to do a long journey and she didn’t actually use it that often when she lived with us but for her it was, it was the back up of having it like you were saying for example, to be able to go to a Garden Centre or something like that, so you have access to that convenience if you need it, but for most things she would use the train or the bus.  Or cycle as well, she did a lot of cycling.  
Moderator: Thank you very much.  Slight change of topic but not that much, I want to ask you about your holiday travel.  How often if you can recall that.
Tony: This is where your green lifestyle goes out the window isn’t it!
Sheila: It is!!
Moderator: How often are you going on holidays?
Sheila: Carbon footprints are enormous!
Moderator: What are your preferred destinations, and how do you go there?  Sheila you made a start!
Sheila: Mea Culpa, mea culpa!  Yes I’m afraid I have to be green when I’m at home, coz I do a lot of travelling.
Moderator: Where do you go?
Sheila: A lot of flying.  All over the world.  
Moderator: To which places?  Everywhere?
Sheila: Yes basically!  Apart from, I haven’t been to Russia, but most, or South America, sorry I haven’t been to the true South America, but most of the rest of the World I’ve travelled to at one time or another.  
Claire: You must have been lucky to do that!
Sheila: I had to work hard first of all!
Moderator: Because you don’t do it that much I guess?
Claire: No because we’ve got 2 small children it’s difficult at the moment, but before I had them I’ve been to a few places but that was just like on a plane or on ferries, but I don’t travel abroad very often.  No not recently.  
Moderator: OK.  Within the country?  Do you go on holiday sometimes?
Claire: Yes, we go like down to Cornwall, things like that, we would just get the train down there.  And just have a little caravan holiday or something.  It’s quite convenient. It’s all right.
Moderator: What about your holiday travel?
John: Until a couple of years ago we were getting into the habit of flying around on holiday, we quite like that and that would have continued but now that prices are going the way they are, there is always the feeling that you’re being robbed left, right and centre, and I don’t like that.  And I think this flying all over the world is, has come to a halt temporarily hasn’t it?  Well it could be permanent couldn’t it, we’re not so keen to fly here, there and everywhere, as we used to do.
Mary: We go to America occasionally but it’s perhaps every 2 or 3 years or something.  But we’re reasonable happy to travel in this country and it’s nearly always by train.  Although we sometimes hire a car at the other end, at the places we go, the actual travel is by train.  
Moderator: Tony?
Tony: Holiday travel, maybe once a year, last year was to Greece for us for a week, Greek Islands, that’s generally flying.  But [35.28] I played Rugby last year in Exeter and we used to fly up to like Rotherham and places up there, for away trips and that was, we didn’t pay for that so that was alright.  
Moderator: I see.  OK.  Bill maybe.
Bill: I used to go, can’t now because my insurance is so high, if I go out of the country.  I had a double bypass an Aorta operation, and I’m now waiting to go in to have a heart valve put in, so my travel abroad is out completely.
Moderator: OK.
Bill: It costs, if I went to the States, the insurance would be minimum £2,000, it would cost more than what the holiday itself, so you just, unless you cheat and don’t tell them, but then you need to have it if something happens.  
Female: Millions!
Bill: Yes!  So it’s local it’s, we’re in a beautiful part of the country, so Cornwall’s always awaiting me, it’s. I was taken there as a child and I’ve always kept going back, you know.  St Ives is one of my favourites and you name it Cornwall’s lovely, and Devon equally.  Now that is something I have done, catching the bus.  To go to Sidemouth because we got a bus stop across the road which I can walk to, mind there is no pavement to go onto the road, so we’ve got to take a risk now going across the road, there’s a little grass bank, so if I slip and go into a car..  To get on, but coming back you’ve got to walk up back the hill.  And that’s the hard bit for me!  But still I do go to Sidemouth for a day trip on the bus that is quite nice.  Especially Festival Week.  But other than that it’s local.  
Moderator: Thanks
Bill: Used to be, but local now.
Moderator: OK.  Sandra, do you think, I just add something before you start but you can go ahead, again I want to ask you about your holidays today, and these days, but do you think your holidays are different from lets say 5 years ago or something like that?
Sandra: They are different from 5 years ago but only that actually I have the money to be able to do different holidays now so going back 5 years I wasn’t long out of University and couldn’t afford to do very much and it would have been very much local holidays, I have a real dilemma when it comes to holidays because I have that ethical moral dilemma over do I you know create a massive carbon footprint by flying, and I absolutely love travelling, I haven’t been anywhere neat as many places as Sheila!  But I had a sabbatical a few years ago from school and I lived in Singapore for a little while and travelled a bit from Singapore, and I did actually do quite a lot of that on the train, I travelled through Malaysia and Thailand by train which is fantastic, because you get to see so much more of the country.  But I do have that dilemma of I want to be able to go and see places and kind of open my mind up to you know, other parts of the World, but I have that difficulty with you know, how, what kind of damage I’m doing environmentally when I do that kind of travelling.  Also my Husband’s American so we have the issue of going back to visit family so, which is a bonus because we get to go out there fairly regularly but that means we have to have a certain amount of our holidays going over to visit them.  So it kind of ties us to flying really with that.  So that’s kind of difficult to get around really.  There is not a lot we can do about that.  
Claire: At least you think about that, some people won’t even think about the damage that they are doing.  At least you understand what you are doing.
Sandra: For me it’s a balance, we have all our energies through a green supplier, we have [39.44] electricity so we have, they provide through green energies pretty much constantly.  And we are pretty good about you know insulating and that kind of thing so in terms of our living style, and transport as far as possible really, we’re relatively green, if you would like to put that word on it.  That’s one area where I’m really not!  
Moderator: I see.  Thanks.  You mentioned something, you said you used the train in Thailand, I mean not to get to Thailand obviously but, in Thailand.  So in general would you say you travel differently when you are on holiday at these places than at home?
Sandra: In other countries when I’ve been abroad I will always travel by public transport, as far as possible.  I wouldn’t very often hire a car, except for the, the exception is in the States because it is almost impossible to travel by public transport over there.  Where my Husband’s family live there’s a certain amount of transport, they live in Minneapolis and there’s a really good tram system that they’ve recently put in.  The Lightvales system is really good there and the busses actually aren’t too bad but where my Husband used to live in St Paul there, it was hopeless.  And I used to be really stuck when I was over there to get around.  But in other places when I’ve been in, certainly when I was in Singapore, in Singapore it is incredibly expensive to have a car anyway and transport over there is amazing.  You can get from one side of Singapore to the other for about $16 which is the equivalent of about £5 or £6 and you travel from Singapore, we went by bus up into Malaysia and all the way up into Thailand and it was about £14 or something like that, so it’s incredibly cheap and, you know not luxurious trains but they’re not bad, and you get a sleep and a bed overnight as well.  Certainly in that part of the World I would always travel by train.  Train would be my first choice, and then by coach, coz they’re freezing in Malaysia!  So they are my second choice!
Moderator: Thanks.  Mary.  When you are on holiday do you think you travel differently at these places?
Mary: I don’t know really, it depends where we’re going I think if we go to Manchester which we do because I’m from round there as well, we would use the tram system there, it’s convenient, it’s clean, it’s quick and takes you where you want to go, we’ve just been up to Northumberland, we went by train but we hired a car at the other end because we couldn’t have gone anywhere.  I think probably our transport is more varied possibly, I don’t know really.  I mean we do use a lot of public transport anyway, we’ve used trains in France and Italy, but America it would always be car.   
Bill: It would have to be.
Mary: It would have to be.  
Bill: You can’t go anywhere by ..
Mary: Minneapolis and St Paul’s area and you can’t go anywhere you know…
Sandra: We tried to do a trip from Minneapolis over to West Virginia with quite a bunch of us and we were desperately trying to go by train or busses and we couldn’t.
Mary: There’s very little public transport on the trains, it’s nearly all freight.  
Bill: It’s all freight isn’t it?
Mary: Yes.
Sandra: It’s expensive as well – incredibly.
Mary: Yes.  I think it depends where we are and we would try and use public transport.
Tony: We use the bus service if you could call it that in Malta, nearly killed us!  But we used it!  I don’t recommend it!
Mary: But you can get all round Malta quite easily on the bus it’s just very hard suspension isn’t it, and a bit rattly!  But yes, I mean it’s there and we would use it, and we did use it.  
Tony: Did you take your aspirins with you?
Mary: Yes.  But depends what the public transport is like I guess is what we’re saying, if it’s good and convenient we’ll use it, if it isn’t then we’re in to hiring a car but that’s always the last resort I think for us now.  It would never be car first.  In Egypt it would be a camel of something wouldn’t it!  
Moderator: Sheila
Sheila: I would think for a lot of people it would be the case that perhaps maybe there would be more inclined to use public transport when they are on holiday because they have more time.
Mary: More time yes.
Sheila: You know there aren’t the time restrictions so you know if you don’t get there in 10 or 15 minutes even an hour late it really doesn’t matter because you know, you’re on holiday.  So I think that could..
Moderator: Is it the same for you?  You said you travel a lot.  Or is it just..
Sheila: Yes, we do try to use the local transport, I mean not only because it’s green but also we like to get involved with the local cultures so, you know that’s part of being away from home.
Moderator: OK.
Sandra: I suppose it’s for some people it would be a language issue wouldn’t it.  Because the culture’s so different, if you don’t speak the language when you get thrown onto public transport!  I had a fantastic experience in the Bahamas where they just had a mini-bus which flies up and down the road, a tiny little island that doesn’t go very far, but it literally, no sign nothing, you know, you get on it and you sit on the bus and they don’t take any money and they hare off down the road and people seem to kind of slip the driver some notes when they get off the bus, but if you don’t know culturally what you have to do then you’re faced with this really difficult situation and I suppose you would avoid that awkwardness and you would prefer to drive because then you are in control of where you are going and how you do it and so on.  
Claire: I’d be quite nervous if I went to use public transport in other countries, you know didn’t know the language and the culture.  It would be quite nerve racking.
Sheila: That’s possibly…
Claire: Once you’ve done it the first time you’d be OK then.
Sheila: That’s possibly one of the reasons why you go abroad isn’t it, to experience something different.  Because you know how it works over here but I think that’s part of the holiday and you know, don’t speak the language I’m English, you know that explains a lot.  But that is part of it I think!
John: We were escorted off the bus in Italy by the inspector, handful of money, no – and he took us round the side of the bus and pointed right at the back to where it said in English buy your tickets from the local tobacconist, well we got on the bus at the other end!  I just knew something was going to go wrong when the inspector got on!  Everybody else was just showing a little ticket, you know and we hadn’t got one you see!
Sheila: But those are part of life’s experiences aren’t they, it’s what makes life interesting isn’t it?  You don’t do it again do you?
John: Could do without that!  
Sandra: Depends on your attitude towards it isn’t it?
Mary: Yes you have to laugh don’t you!
Sandra: If you take that attitude then it’s great!
Mary: Yes but it’s not easy when it’s in a foreign country I agree.  
Moderator: Tony
Tony: [47.01] 
Moderator: James?
James: I was saying I think every city would do well to have like a metal [47.12] It was actually ideal when I used to live there 
Sheila: Yes it’s brilliant.
James: I lived there all my life, when they did get the Metro put in 
Sheila: Yes.  They’re extending it as well aren’t they up there?
James: There are quite a lot of people that use it now instead of using their cars. 
Sheila: Well they’ve got one in Newcastle as well, we use that when we go there.  It’s brilliant, it’s reasonably cheap and you know goes from A to B and it’s clean generally.
James: Yes you can get almost anywhere really.
Sheila: Yes.  It’s very good, yes.
Moderator: Tony now?
Tony: It’s the sort of thing that hovers.  Hover transport.
Moderator: Have you used, do you use other forms of transport when you are on holiday?
Tony: The tube or whatever it is in Sidney which was awesome.  It was just clean and really good compared to the tube in London which is hot and sweaty and a bit dirty.  And then yes, it was just, it’s just in other countries you seem to be like when my parents went to Paris recently they used the Metro there, and said how convenient it is and how cheap it is.  And just how everyone uses it, [48.15] Australia, travelled there and everyone got coaches and trains really, it was just very easy to do.  But then when you get to London you’ve got to use the tube really because you haven’t got much choice because there is no chance of [48.33] and on the tube is pretty convenient and reliable as well.  Although it is not particularly clean or pleasant in rush hour. 
Sandra: You realise that more when you go to other countries, you said about Sidney and Singapore similarly, it’s just…
Tony: It’s so clean, Singapore is such a clean city.  But London, you get there and it’s just hot and you sit there and go this is horrible. 
Moderator: I see.  
Sheila: I think a lot of places don’t, they haven’t go the population that we’ve have
Tony: No, true.
Sheila: You know it’s very easy for Sidney and places like that to provide a nice you know clean, service but as I say there’s not the number of people they have to cope with.
Tony: But also the tubes pretty old as well.
Sheila: It is yes, it’s ancient.
Tony: Exactly.
Sheila: I mean Paris system has all, I mean they are all works of art aren’t they?  The Paris stations. 
Moderator: Thanks.  Another issue on my list I have to ask you, is anybody aware of the meaning of, we sometimes use the term sustainable travel, can anybody have an idea of what that means?
Claire: I don’t know, sorry.
John: I suppose you could say anything to do with petrol, diesel, oil is unsustainable in the long run is that what you mean?
Moderator: Kind of that yes.  You are quite right yes.  I can explain it to you, I mean the council says sustainability just refers to mainly environmentally friendly modes of transport, and but it also includes some social aspects and other economic aspects.  And the main goal is to sort of say save the world for future generations, you know, and we can also refer to environmentally friendly because it is pretty much linked to that.  You know, I just want to ask you do you think you travel sustainable or environmentally friendly or maybe why or why not.  Bill maybe first.
Bill: Well I travel basically as I said by car and I always had you know, I used to do 30,000 miles a year, and that’s working between a 12 and 18 hour day.  Yes, I don’t know I think the trouble is, is basically we’re always going to have a problem with cars, always.  If you drive a car fast you burn more fuel, if you go over 60 you are pushing the exhaust out, irrespective of whether you’ve got a cleaner or not.  When they stop advertising new cars that can do 185 miles an hour, and the people that buy them say right, I’m going to try it, and that’s basically they drive so hard and so fast you can actually see it on a nice day, you can see it.  Rising up of the motorway.  And until that’s stopped you won’t do much about it.  It is just people, they’ve got to get there before everybody else, I’ve got to get home, I don’t know what program they want to see, but No I must get home.  And it happens here in Exeter I’m just near a main road Sidemouth Road, that is 40mph up that hill, it’s not it’s a 30mph limit, there’s no signs, there is up on the roundabout, but they go up and down there terrible.  And motorbikes do wheelies up there!  You know, the exhaust is, you get it on the windows, so it’s all down to the toys, I must have a toy to drive.  Not a car to get from A to B, an economical car, where it can get from A to B, I know I like extra comfort, but it is better to have a car that will be green.  And 1,400 cars to me is ample.  I don’t need 2 litres and 3 litre cars that…  No.
Sheila: You can if you sort of get of the green state of mind you can buy a car which it’s carbon emissions are much less than other cars.  You pay less tax and all the rest of it don’t you.  So if you have to use a car that is an option that we’ve all got if can afford to do it.  I mean our friend has got a Jag, a reasonably new Jag and the emissions are far, far less on that than our old car and his road tax is accordingly less than half what we pay.  So it doesn’t have to be a little car, it can be a bigger car if people need a big car for whatever reason.  But of course there are small cars around and you pay something like £35 tax instead of whatever ours is, what’s ours?  £190 or something.  
John: About £170.
Sheila: So there are cost benefits as well as the other sort of green issue that is around that. 
: 