Name of speaker: Transcription
Jan: So welcome everybody, it’s nice to have you here, it’s a great pleasure and your help is really much appreciated.  As I maybe explained to you during the recording, maybe not to you, but we’re doing a project on travel behaviour and we want to hear about people’s travel experiences and maybe draw some conclusions, measures or what they think about certain measures and yeah, well just guide you through the discussion and ask you a couple of questions and then you are free to answer them and as I said before it’s a really relaxed discussion and I only want to ask you that you just, that one person per time speaks.  Somebody will say something and if you want to add something then you can go afterwards, but just as I said it’s relatively relaxed and should be nice discussion I think.    First thing I want to ask you is just a short introduction round.  My name is Moderator, I’m a researcher here at Exeter University at the department of Geography and if you’d just say your first name and what you do in business, or what you’re doing at the moment and maybe where you live that would be nice.
Tim: Hi, my name’s Tim and I live in Exeter, I’m 22.
Peter: I’m Peter, pretty ancient, 64, engineer.
Matt: My name’s Matt, I’m 33 and studying at university level and I’m working part-time.
Paul: I’m Paul, Paul, 60. Retired, currently doing accountancy.
Moderator: Thank you very much.  First thing I want to ask is, maybe to fill out these things.  We’ve maybe asked these things before but just to let you reflect and we’ll have a discussion about that later.  If you need some pens I can provide 3, but I need one back because I’m a little bit short of pens.  Take your time, as I said take something to eat, take a snack and if you want something to drink just.
Peter: By choice mode do you mean what you’d like to do or what you actually do?
Moderator: What you actually and alternatives more the like to do thing.  If you can think about an alternative or.  We’ll have this in the discussion later, so it’s just something to stick on, to start with.
Matt: Depends how you look at this doesn’t it.  Going on holiday, depends where you’re going.
Matt: That’s rather lavish isn’t it?  No I meant there’s a lot there, was there a lot of people?
Moderator: Yeah, it’s hard to predict always you know and we’re always thinking that 4-10 people could show up you know, and so you have to calculate it at 10 people to make sure that everybody gets something.  But as much as you can you’re free to take anything you want.  University catering and I think it’s really good to be honest.  I know of other universities and it’s a little bit worse.  Thank you very much, we’ll just leave these sheets with you and start with my first topic, daily travel behaviour so to say.  If you could think about the modes of transport you usually use, if you go to work, or if you go for shopping or for leisure trips, weekend trips, or if you have to travel for your relation, something like that, what modes of transport do you usually use?
Tim: If it’s within sort of like town, within reasonable distance, like to and from town or the same sort of distance then personally I’d probably just walk or cycle. Further trips drive, take the car.
Moderator: Do you have a car?
Tim: Well I have had a car, I don’t have a car at the moment but I do drive, I had a car for a while.
Peter: Well I walk when I can.  I work locally and usually walk and that’s what I would do.  And shopping also the preferred preference is walking, but if you get the food for example as I do, it’s a daily trip to the supermarket. Try doing that walking, doesn’t work.  So for that shopping I put car as preferred, it’s not really, but that’s what I usually end up using.  But walking when I can, it depends what I’m going to get.  If I’m going to get something in town and being ancient I have a free bus pass so that’s quite handy, if you’re carrying stuff especially for getting home.
Moderator: So you said for some reasons you have to use a car, is this mainly for longer distance sort of thing?
Peter: Not particularly but if you buy food, unless you’re just going to get it daily for yourself.  I live on my own so it is only me, so if I didn’t have the car it would be using the more local shops and walking, if I didn’t have a car.  But having the car, having brought up a family the habit has always been the weekly shop and it tends to sort of stick, so that’s what I still do.  It’s also cheaper isn’t it?  But that’s not, that’s just covering the work and the shopping isn’t it.  I mean if you wanted more, there’s other things on the list here, so I don’t seem to get holidays these days, but if it’s a holiday abroad then you go with an aircraft don’t you.  Trips to the countryside well again it’s nice to use a train if you can use a reasonable priced fair, if you go to London or somewhere and you’ve got a bit of notice it’s cheaper to go by train in advance than it is by car.  But if you need to go for a day for business or something you won’t find it cheaper then probably, if you haven’t got notice.  It’s very difficult to be precise about the answers isn’t it?  The reason, I hesitate to say this really, the reason for working is to get cash, I’ve got a share in an aircraft and a pilot’s license and I do some flying, so trips to the countryside, the preferred route would be in the aircraft. I just thought I’d give you a bit of a departure.
Paul: I travel mainly by car now.  Up to eight years ago I enjoyed walking as a major, local shops etc, but due to the fact that I’ve got heart disease, muscro angina, rheumatoid arthritis and osteo-arthritis I’m afraid that’s not afforded to me anymore, so I rely totally on my car.  But if I’m going into town I catch a bus as my other mode of transport, but as I said preferably it’s the car.  If we’re visiting my daughter, daughters, it’s plane.  One lives in Jersey and the other one lives in Inverness in Scotland, so I’ve only ever tried driving the once and it was 13 hours and quite frankly it very nearly killed me and I said never ever again, so I don’t.  It’s an hour and fifteen minutes by plane, so quite honestly there’s no competition is there.  Nine hours by train, so we fly up.
Matt: How much difference is it between if you’re flying to Scotland than it is for the train to Scotland?
Paul: 8 hours by train.
Matt: No I mean how much it costs?
Paul: Oh yeah an incredible difference.  If you go online and pick up cheap flights it can be as little as £38 return but now Exeter’s actually flying out of Exeter straight into Inverness they do reasonable flights but they charge you a £40 surcharge each.  
Matt: What for?
Paul: Well you tell me I really don’t know.  But if you go out from Bristol you can get flights as cheap as £38, £39.
Matt: How much would it cost on the train then?
Paul: About £89 each to £90 each.  And about £300 by car.
Moderator: Thank you Paul, Matt what about you?  What do you use normally?
Matt: Well I did have a motorbike up until about 6, 7 months ago.  But it broke and I come to university, started here and so I walked everywhere, apart from that I have occasionally caught the bus but usually you see me walking down the street with about five bags of shopping.  Well we’ve moved a couple of different places, but we try to generally locate ourselves between the kind of city centre or expensive corner shops everywhere.  Apart from that the occasional night out we use a taxi but my Mum lives on Portland so I take the Jurassic Coast bus down there and it’s like £5.50 and you can just like use it for the whole journey and then get off in Weymouth, my girlfriends family live down in Swanwich so you can still stay on that bus and go and see them.  So it’s only £5.50 it’s really good value.  I’ve done the, I’ve tried each one.  I went by train and you have to go past it to Castle Kerry and then it changes and you come back upon yourself, but then it costs you an arm and a leg for that, because you’re going an extra third of your journey, plus you have to wait for the changeover.  Haven’t flown unfortunately, that would, maybe you could drop me off one day. Sometimes I take the coach sorry and that’s £11 but you can get a good deal if you actually go in the shop which is £5 so it’s the same but you’d have to pay again for Weymouth but it’s an hour less, because it takes three and a half hours along the Jurassic coast.
Moderator: So you always compare between the price and the time it takes?15.44
Matt: Yeah, sometimes I want to get there quicker than three and a half hours, on the coast, so I’d jump on the other one which is slightly more expensive.  If you can get a good deal then it’s two hours.  But if you use a car, obviously, so sometimes my mum picks us up.
Moderator: I want you to think about if there are things you like about the way you travel.  You’ve already told me something, for instance you’re flying a couple of times and maybe there’s something you like about that and maybe there’s something’s you don’t like.  I will start with you Peter.  I’m referring to the daily travel, I mean you probably don’t fly every day but…
Peter: No, I’m not flying at all just at the moment which is part of the problem, but perhaps come to that.  I enjoy walking and despite sort of the costly air travel as far as the environments concerned, I am sort of aware and in fact in my full time employment I was energy manager for the city council.  So I sort of have a sort of slight conscious about this and sort of feel I mustn’t be using fuel when I’m not extravagantly going about in the aircraft.  But having said that I enjoy walking anyway, I will make an effort to walk so that’s the sort of philosophy there.  But that’s not to say I don’t enjoy driving if it’s a reasonable day and not through congestion and traffic you know, when they…
Paul: We do test driving and I really do, it’s horrendous, unfortunately I don’t have a choice.  Which saddens me really because the known infrastructure that they’ve built within Exeter, it just seems endless amounts of traffic getting stuck in.  Traffic lights seem to take forever to change, there’s no vehicles coming either way and you’re thinking well why am I sat here.  Why am I sat in my car just burning petrol for the sake of it, there’s absolutely no need at all.   Because if the traffic lights were set correctly, properly they would detect the car and away you would go.  It’s quite simple isn’t it.
Matt: Traffic lights in [18.29] it’s a nightmare, as a pedestrian as well.  We lived originally by Imperial we were living down there and it was the first time I’d ever been, well I’d been to the sea and stuff but I’d never noticed there was this kind of, it was the only place I know where you press the button and only go halfway across the road, stand on the island and have to press another button just to get to the other side of the road, I mean it’s ridiculous.
Paul: I mean I blame Devon County council totally for the sham or for the lack of planning that’s gone into Exeter, because since it’s gone from Exeter City Council to Devon County Council it’s a sheer fiasco, I mean it’s just bizarre how they can sit in their offices, coming up with these weird and wonderful ideas to put a bus stop right on a corner, of roadworks and all sorts of weird and wonderful things and you think well why, these people are getting paid quite considerable sums of money, to do the planning and there’s no real planning gone into it, there’s no thought process gone into it at all.  And then they’re allowing these utility companies to reap even more havoc, so they send you four miles out of your way to go a hundred metres, that would normally have been.  But it’s actually four miles you are travelling now to get back to where.  And ten weeks this has been going on for.  And to the point of total frustration I phoned up Devon County and asked who was actually getting the back hander out of it because somebody must be, because you would not allow utility companies to reap sheer havoc in Exeter the way they have.  It’s just totally bizarre.
Moderator: Tim, sorry what do you think about these issues?  What do you like about your daily travel and maybe something’s you don’t like, like other people on the table, that’s OK.
Tim: I had a couple of previous jobs which involved driving.
Moderator: What was it?
Tim: One was, it was actually I would drive canvassers, they were doing door canvassing work and I’d drive them to where they needed to go and that was sort of in and around Devon, in Somerset.  And you’d spend you know just half your day just sat in traffic, especially on the way home after work.  But personally I like to cycle, you get through the traffic easily, and obviously when other cyclists go through red lights then people shout at you because they think you’re about to go through red lights.  But the only thing about cycling is obviously the other vehicles on the road of course are larger than you, you’re a lot more vulnerable and yeah I think, not speaking for myself but I think other people who may be a bit more nervous, don’t cycle for that reason.  Because there are drivers who are not paying attention to cyclists, it’s just one of those things you don’t really think about.
Matt: I was going to say being on my motorbike, it was like constantly happening, they just wouldn’t bother indicating, they’d just cut up in front of you, they’d pull out from out of nowhere and just drive as if you were in thin air.  Because they don’t see, they’re expecting a body of mass, molecules coming towards them, all they see is this little bit…
Paul: What I was going to mention was that had they done the planning in the proper manner, I see no reason at all, because they can do it in some parts of Exeter, not in all parts of Exeter, that cyclist are allowed to cycle on pavements.  It isn’t like we’ve got hundreds of thousands of bicycles in Exeter, in fact there’s more cars than bicycles.  That way the cyclist only really got to pay attention to pedestrians, they don’t have to pay attention to lorries, cars, buses and everything else, you know, if they freed up the pavements…
Matt
: Can I intercede though.  If you’re actually on a road and you’re driving along and somebody’s skipping in and out of people on and off the road.
Paul: No I mean, if you go up over Pinhole Road I’ll give you that as an example, you go through Postal Bridge, up through Pinhole Road, well all that one pavement except for I think it’s about 2 foot wide for pedestrians, the inside lane is purely for bicycles.  
Matt: And they’ve got the actual bicycle lane in that?
Paul: Yeah, bicycle lane all the way up through.  Well all our pavements in and around Exeter are about the same width, so I really can’t see why they couldn’t extend it much further through, so you don’t have to get on and off roads, so once you’ve got a free cycle path all the way around that way vehicles don’t have to worry about cyclists.
Matt: I thought you meant you know you’d prefer them to be on the pavement and on the roads….
Paul: No, I’m just saying it makes the cyclists feel safer and the drivers they don’t have to worry about bicycles swerving in or out or anything like that and like I said it happens quite successfully up Pinhole Road, I’ve watched it with great delight really over they years how they’ve extended it.  It’s not a huge sum of money. It’s just one line on the path itself.  With periodically like every 50 metres, or every 50 yards, they put a little cycle on there.  But a lot of cyclists are not aware of that so you see a lot of cyclists on the road, but again it should be advertised to say to people that it’s a lot safer, we’ve actually put these lanes in for you, for your purpose.
Matt
: I mean if it gets a bit thin you could always put a drop kerb and have like…
Paul: Well that’s exactly what’s happening, they’ve done all that as well, crossings and…
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  Peter do you want to add something to this topic?
Peter: I’m perhaps fortunate I’ve got flexibility in working and what have you and I can usually avoid the worst of congestion, but yeah, I don’t, talking about driving I don’t particularly enjoy it, I like to saunter along the country lane and stuff, when I want to that sort of thing.  That to me is motoring which I really enjoy.
Moderator: Thanks.
Peter: But otherwise if I’m going somewhere it’s better in the aircraft looking down on places.
Moderator: Just another thing.  I want you to think about when your travel behaviour, or your travel mode you use last changed you know?  I mean there maybe was some reason why it changed and I want you to think about if you can reconsider when it changed and why.  Maybe starting with Tim.
Tim: Well as I said previously I used to drive,  I used to have a car, I don’t anymore.  Primarily for the expense of running a vehicle and I live near the city centre and unless I’m going out windsurfing or something like that, something like that I can share a vehicle so I don’t need a vehicle for general living, I don’t need a car, like Peter mentioned earlier, shopping, obviously like my age you can carry it if you need to.  Yeah so we changed when I got rid of the car, I started cycling pretty much everywhere and also just walking, basically from where I live it takes me ten minutes to walk into the city centre, so I don’t see the need to drive or get a bus or even cycle really because you have to find somewhere to lock it up, so really I just walk into town and just cycle to the outskirts of town that sort of thing.
Moderator: Interesting, yeah thanks.  Peter did something change for you, maybe during your last years or, the last months?
Peter: No.  Circumstances are not great, circumstances have changed but not to effect the way I move about substantially.  No.
Moderator: And can you reconsider when it last changed?  For instance I don’t know if you used a car before and why do you stop it or something like that?
Peter: I can’t say that it’s been, I’ve not been flying forever, it’s a relatively new acquisition the license, but you’re not talking months, you’re talking of you know five, six years.  So that’s the sort of new mode of travel that, it’s very infrequent but it can be very useful, has been very useful for the odd trip.
Matt: Can you hire out planes and just like fly them?
Peter: You can hire but I’ve got a share so if you’re talking about mode of transport that’s what two of us decided to do was to buy aircraft in a poor state, most people pay more for a car, so it required stripping, rebuilding and without having a long experience in aviation there was quite a steep learning curve attached to all that.  But you can very easily get friendly with inspectors and that who are very keen to help and so we were able to do it and make a good job of it.  We even finished up winning a prize at Waddington for the best protected aircraft.  
Matt: Is there normally somebody who pilots it and flies it and makes you guys a bit of money sort of thing until you want to..  Sorry do you hire it out generally throughout the year then and then use it whenever you want?
Peter: No, it becomes, no it’s a private arrangement, it’s like with a car.  I don’t know how we’d get on for hiring the aircraft out, I think they’d certainly be insurance implications.
Matt: So it sits in a hangar when you guys don’t want to use it?
Peter: We lend it occasionally, but very occasionally and there’s about two of us, but yes it’s not overused.
Matt: I didn’t know if you’d have to kind of like, to keep it running you’d have to kind of pay for a pilot, well use a…
Peter: What for the economics you mean?
Matt: Well I thought maybe that some guy would kind of like, you know you could hire it out to sort of pilots or something?
Peter: We have had enquiries yes.  But it’s not, well there’s implications, there’s legalities and what have you.  What we can do is if an inspector or an instructor wants it for that purpose that’s easy, they always cover for that so we would certainly be, well we’ve done it.  But other than that, that’s the reason for working, while I’ve got work and got an income, but that takes time that restricts me from flying, so it’s a bit of a juggling trick.
Moderator: Matt you said you had a car for places in town where you lived.  Was there some related to your daily travel.  So to say do you change your travel or did you choose places to live by the way you travel or something like that?
Matt: Initially no, we just kind of got a place which was either on campus or within campus accommodation, just happened to be…
Moderator: But you wanted to be near campus?
Matt: It didn’t affect us basically initially but nothing changed in that sense.  I didn’t really care about how close I was to town because they have got amenities up at the university but it was nice for the fact that it was closer.  But my second move that did have an effect because I moved to Pennsylvania Road as opposed to Old Tiburn Road, because I thought well it would be closer, but now I’m even further away, because the people sold the house we had to move and then we had like a choice of a few different places and this came out at the right time really.  I think by October when I go back though I’ll either have my own bike, so that’ll change again, so it won’t matter so long as I’m within a certain radius really.  But occasionally I will get a bus if I’m running late.
Moderator: Paul, did you travel, motor travel behaviour change during the last year or so, or these last months?
Paul: Not in the last year no.  Up to nine years ago, it’s only in the last nine years I’ve actually owned a vehicle again because the, life’s deteriorated, disability.  But I used to certainly enjoy cycling and walking prolifically, proud of that because I had no vehicle and I was then living in Topsham Road, which was very close to the Royal Devon and the Nuffield, so one I didn’t need a vehicle, two I didn’t really want one.  It never crossed my mind and like I said it was only after taking premature retirement etc, I found that the onslaught of the disabilitating heart disease it was just impractical now for me to walk more than 100 metres, it would cause me a great deal of pain.  So unfortunately I don’t have a choice, other than to drive my vehicle.  If I am in town you know I’ve used a bus to get into town, then I take as long as it’s possible and I sit down as many times as I need to, but even that it’s becoming a bit of a juggling act, because if you cross the high street, the buses have got no or little regard to the fact that you may be disabled, you may be elderly, you may have difficulty crossing the roads, so you’re almost taking your life in your hands. As I said to you when you visited me I’ve travelled quite extensively through Britain and other towns that we have within Britain have proper pedestrian shopping precincts and proper shopping areas, Carwell was one that springs to mind because we visited it extensively.  And they seem to run it quite successfully but for some again reason, bad planning they cannot get that together in Exeter, so as I said to cross any of the major roads in Exeter, you’ve got to be very quick on your toes and unfortunately I can’t so I dread going in.  Although I used to love …
Matt: Sorry, would these buses be able to get to one part to the other part of town without going through it?
Paul: Well they don’t really need to because in Carwell what they do, they drop you off like the nearest point would be Power Street, you know they’ve got a big bus station, so all the buses go to the actual bus station, and the town is within walking distance, it’s easily walkable, you haven’t got to worry about traffic or vehicles or anything else, you just stroll along, taking your time and you haven’t got to worry about buses because you know they’re non-existent.  And it could be done in Exeter, I mean there’s plenty of areas where they could make buses congregate, you know there’s three that springs to mind for me anyway.  And there’s no reason on earth why they couldn’t get the buses to stop there and allow people to actually use a precinct shopping centre, 
Matt: One of the main roads and then they have to turn off down what is it, are you saying like you know if you seal off the kind of city centre, from buses altogether is there anyway those buses can get from one side of the town to the other without, is there enough other roads for it to be able?
Paul: Well you know if you go to Weymouth, you go to the bus station, now it’s a huge bus station.
Matt: They’ve got a pedestrianised zone, one street’s pedestrianised and the other street isn’t and they work around, you walk into the main, but I was just wondering if they could do that with the kind of ..
.Paul: Well what I’m saying is they could make the buses stop in the bus station, would be one point, so the top end of town, you know you’ve only got to walk through the lane there, I forget what the lanes called, going into Sibel Street, in actual fact there’s three points that you can come into Sibel Street.  They could also do parking at what I call the old bus street which was in Pole Street, and you could get to the high street, there’s again four or five points that you could get into the high street from, within walking distance and then further down into Ford Street, there’s plenty of areas there that you know they could run buses to easy, because it’s a bit of a one way system anyway, but the only people who are allowed to use this is buses.
Moderator: Sorry to interrupt you but actually you’ve come up with another issue maybe we can continue. Peter do you have something to add?
Peter: I’ve forgotten what the question was.
Moderator: OK, just ask my next question OK.
Peter: You’re looking for a question?
Moderator: No, no, no, I’m just telling you the next question you know.  I would just slightly change the topic to your holiday travel. I mean Paul you said you’d travelled a lot before and maybe it’s not that much anymore I guess.
Paul: More, I travel much more now.
Moderator: Only for holidays?
Paul: Yes.
Moderator: OK, so can you just tell us how often do you go on holidays and what are your preferred destinations and what do you use for modes of transport.
Paul: Normally 5. 6 times a year, either to Jersey, visit my daughter, Scotland, we travel all round Scotland because I’ve got another daughter that lives in Inverness, we go to Greece quite a bit or Corfu, at least twice a year we go to Corfu, but each time we fly, we’ve only ever gone on the what do they call it, Catamaran thing, so the Condor the once and unfortunately it was extremely choppy at that time so we didn’t enjoy the trip at all.
Moderator: Thanks, Tim what about you?  Do you often go on holidays, or do you have the time or the money or?
Tim: Not really.  I’ve never been abroad, I was looking to go to Australia with my ex-girlfriend, possibly going to go to Canada, again take a plane, but I’ve never actually been outside of the UK so.
Moderator: But within the UK?
Tim: Within the UK, as far as transport I’d take a train if it was in the UK, if it was more than a certain amount of miles, but obviously if you go on holiday it’s going to be a fair distance away so yeah, it’d be train unless it was somewhere like Scotland and my father used to live in Scotland and I went to see him once and yeah that was by plane, but apart from that the only sort of holidays I’ve been on have been like a couple of weeks back I just went up to Dartmoor and that was to walk, but to get there we just took the bus.  So yeah.
Moderator: OK.  Peter what about you?
Peter: Right we used to enjoy summer holidays in a Mediterranean country, we went to a number of them.  Very sadly my wife died not too long ago, the situation’s sort of all changed, I don’t feel that I want to go on trips like that on my own.  So my trips now are short trips to see, I’ve got a daughter and grandchildren, not to mention son-in-law in Oxfordshire, so I go and see them and I’ve also got family locally, but you’re talking about holidays.  I just have the very occasional short trip, I like to spend a day in London, I like a trip to London, I can get there very easily on the train. 
Moderator: And if you go to Oxfordshire what do you use there?  Also the train or?
Peter: Yeah fly.
Moderator: Really?  OK.
Peter: They live next door to the airfield at Enstone,
Moderator: Very convenient.
Peter: It is yeah.  It is.  An hour’s trip and you’re there. Which is …The snag with it is if the weather changes while you’re then it shuts the door for coming back.  And I’ve got the t-shirt for that!  I don’t want anymore.
Moderator: Thanks a lot thank you.
Peter: But yes a day trip or last year friends got married in Pault and the way it turned out I had a couple of very pleasant days in London, I like London, I wouldn’t want to live there but I like it for the atmosphere for a day.  And that was on the train.
Matt: Yeah, I haven’t been abroad for a while, but my girlfriends mother has got a house in the Don Doff, in the French Alps, just near Lake Geneva, just over the border, but she’s got a chalet out there and they’ve got a ski lift right at the bottom of their garden so she is out there quite a lot, but at Christmas we were invited out this time, so but we got engaged so, that’s why, my Dad and Mum are actually currently in America and they’re staying for a month and they sort of do the tour of the West Coast and doing a bit of California and then they’re going inland doing Las Vegas, Grand Canyon and the following week they’re flying off to Hawaii, sorry I think they’re going the third week to Hawaii and then they come back to San Francisco, but now they’ve retired they can fly off to a few different places, but, personally I’ve been to a few different countries.  My girlfriends from Romania and I actually went to like Draculas Council, all over the place.  We went to [44.36] which was that was in 1989, I was in [44.40] so clothes were a bit ratty, bit scary.  But I went to Italy skiing as well, to a place called [44.51], I went to all those flying.  Actually I went to Italy by coach and we sort of travelled all across France, Switzerland.  Been to Spain when I was younger, my Dad was on the Ark Royal so we went everywhere, all around the world and then he was a chef stationed on Portland for helicopter’s pilots.  But personally the last time I was abroad, I went to Cherbourg once, with my friends,  over on the ferry but there’s the condor in Weymouth which you can kind of just hop on if I had the money to do it.  And I went to Tenerife as well, which was really nice.
Paul: A well travelled man isn’t he.
Moderator: I wonder if you can think about, all of you, I want to think about five years or a certain decent period ago, did your holiday travel change a lot compared to today or is it still the same like a couple of years ago?  Would you say.
Peter: Mine’s changed.
Moderator: How?
Peter: Because my wife died that’s why.
Moderator: What do you think Tim?
Tim: Obviously say 5 or 6 years was a good proportion of my life compared to the others.  But, when my family was a family, when all the members of the family were there, if we were going to visit relatives we’d drive, obviously fuel, but even 5 years ago fuel was a huge amount cheaper than it was, so it wasn’t that expensive and also have the freedom, obviously some of the younger kids need to go to the loo, so take a car so you can stop whenever you want that sort of thing.  Now travelling by myself I would take a train, but I think the only difference, the reason for the change in transport is it would just be myself as opposed to a family.
Moderator: Thanks. Paul?
Paul: Yeah, as I’ve previously explained really, I don’t want people to feel sorry for me, saying this man’s disabled and all that, or he’s a miserable git.  I certainly used to enjoy life an awful lot better than I do currently, because I could get about I was more mobile.  Where we would go to the Lake District, because like I said nothing I would enjoy more than to walk everywhere and take all the sights in, all the views, and take as long as you want to do it.  I just find now that unfortunately I can’t, so therefore I’ve ended up one of these miserable old men in a boat you know.  But again like I said, I don’t want nobody to feel sorry for me, because I’ve been paid extremely well for what I’ve done and this is part of the consequences unfortunately.
Moderator: Sorry to hear that.  Well you said you travelled  a lot to see friends and your family and things.
Paul: I still do that, but whereas we used to go to Port Rose in Inverness and all around the north of Scotland, up as far as [48.37], where I would go would be to alter and get out and walk and take in the sites and all that.  Like I say 50 metres now then I’ve had enough, I want to get back in the vehicle, so they say oh, come on Dad you miserable old git, because they don’t realise really how disabilitating the illness is.  But then I certainly enjoy myself, like I say I don’t want anybody to feel sorry for me, because I enjoy life to the full, other than the restrictions that’s on me.
Moderator: Matt, what do you think, did your frequency of holiday travel or the modes you use, did that change in the last couple of years or?
Matt: Well in the last four years, I would say that because I never used to, I didn’t ride up until I was like 28 or 29 and then I passed my sort of CBT sort of thing and decided because I had to get this job which was like 1 o’clock in the morning, it was about 10, 15 miles away, across like a causeway, you know in the middle of winter.  My next door neighbour was selling his bike so I bought it off him for £600, passed my CBT in about a week or so and jumped on the bike  and was using it.  But my brother-in-law, because my cousin does medical, she uses transport for fun really, and is generally well, but his father was like teaching me how to ride.  But yeah in general that really changed a lot to be able to actually ride on the road for myself, before I used to take transport everywhere and I didn’t really know anything about, the freedom of being you know in charge of the vehicle driving really.  But yeah, when I got to Exeter I generally walked everywhere so that’s changed again and hopefully in the future I won’t have to walk so far, so much.  The other thing was I suppose my mum and dad used to drive me a lot around in the car and because they’re sort of 80 miles away now, that’s the only kind of difference really, generally just walk.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  Next point on my list..
Matt: So I would encourage it as well not to bring a car to Exeter University.  They say to all first years not to bring a car with them to try and not be like, to just not congest the roads and other reasons around, they don’t want all the people on the campus having cars. 
Moderator: Just like to put you on another issue, we are sorry to say some people sometimes use the term sustainable travel and I just want to generally know if you can explain what in your understanding this means.  Anybody, who wants to start first, who has an idea of that?
Peter: Sustainable travel if you’re not walking and you’re talking about the environment, what is there that doesn’t use fuel?  And it’s not fuel that’s sustainable.  Arguably there’s fuel from vegetables and things, but it’s a mute point isn’t it, there isn’t really enough land as we’re discovering now and there’s people suffering as a result of doing that, in any case its’ still sort of scratching the surface really, so you can’t really count it as being terribly significant. If you’re not walking you’re not really being very sustainable.
Moderator: Anybody else?
Paul: Well I just believe that, again it’s that old chestnut of mine, I just strongly believe that had they of planned properly for this event, because cars are definitely not sustainable, it goes without saying, that unless they organise the infrastructure properly so people are relying more on public transport.  I mean the bizarrest thing of all if I want to go to Sowton, I’ve got to catch a bus at £1.10 to go into town, to catch a bus which is going to cost me £1.70, that passes my door to go out to Sowton.  I can’t stand at the top of my road and flag down a bus because they won’t stop, because it’s only park and ride, so invariably I see all these buses going backwards and forwards, one maybe two and it just seems a total waste of fuel, money and again that is not sustainable.  They’ve really got to get to grips, organising the public transport in a proper manner, because it just can’t go on with the greed factor, we can use it because it’s there, because one day we’re all going to wake up and it won’t be there literally and you know, I don’t feel sorry for myself because I’m of that age now, I perhaps haven’t got that many more years left of me.  But it’s my children and my grandchildren that I’m really extremely concerned about, because the way we’re going there’s really going to be nothing left at all, we’re going to work ourselves into the grave.
Peter: Trouble is it’s easy to sort of blame lack of planning and that, you haven’t got to think back very far and although the problem was starting to be recognised it didn’t take on the sort of dimensions that it does now and the escalations taken through stages that weren’t envisaged.  So partly there’s lack of planning yes, but it’s not, you know you’ve got to be careful you don’t talk with hindsight, because the situations worse now than was predicted.
Paul: Well with the greatest respect they predicted some 15 years ago.
Peter: Not to be as bad they didn’t.
Paul: Well no, because it’s all gas work, but in point of fact it was predicted that the volume of vehicles that would be on the road now, they were told repeatedly to actually start to organise their infrastructure, i.e. buses, trains, etc.  And everyone’s just sat, these fat cats have just sat on that getting paid for doing virtually nothing at all, because there’s no planning going into the system at all.  And I can remember 15 years ago, when the government of the day was telling these public transport people.
Peter: You’re talking about the congestion, I see where you’re coming from, I was talking the environmental situation.
Paul: No, I’m just purely talking about congestion, because if that had of been in situ then we wouldn’t have the congestion that we’ve got now, so it would have been easier on fuel, etc. etc. So it’s self creating isn’t it.  We’re making more,
Peter: I think it’s a mute point though as to whether, I mean you’re talking about use of public transport and for all that we might say people don’t like, it’s very difficult to make it as convenient as a car, so it’s there when you want it.
Paul: Well realistically people don’t want to catch public transport, you look at the buses they’ve got on the road.  I mean there’s an R registration run bus, P running to and fro, they’re not designed for the public really, ultimately.  And yet they’re getting ¾ million pound a year.  A private bus company of our money.  I think it’s just ludicrous and of which they’ve just spent £80,000 explaining to people on how to catch buses.  I mean, seems incredible to me.
Moderator: I see what you mean, definitely yeah.
Peter: Having said all that I find the buses quite convenient considering my lack of patience because I would not wait at a bus stop for a bus.  But then I’ve got the ability to walk, if I got sore feet it would be different.  And so I won’t wait.  But if you’re in town, I don’t know what for the routes that suit me, you don’t have to wait long, well you don’t have to wait at all, you look round and you’ll find that there’s one of the buses will be going my way.  Now that’s public transport working.
Paul
: I must make that point, it’s only useful when it’s frequent I accept that part of it, I accept that part of the argument, but the problem is they’ve got double decker buses, huge out of date buses, using probably twice if not three times the amount of fuel, they’ve not got modern buses to economise on the trips that they’re making, smaller buses, I mean you’ve only got to look at the transport in action.
Moderator: So it’s maybe a customer flexibility of the company or…
Paul: Well you know for buying a fleet of buses to me it makes common sense if they’re running them that frequent, rather than put a double decker bus on with three people on it, it makes more sense to me to put a smaller bus on, you know it’s not using so much fuel, not taking up as much road space.  I just believe in using common sense.
Matt: Can I just try and answer that question what you originally put for the sustainable?
Moderator: You can do it just by telling us maybe.
Matt: Right sorry.  I was just waiting for my turn.  I was just thinking that sustainable fuels and things like that, like wind turbines that going to stop a lot of the pollution anyway and whether they can use something like they use for the space rockets with oxygen don’t they, would that be so environmentally disastrous to use liquid oxygen in cars, sort of alternative.  Some sort of gas…
Peter: Oxygen comes to carbon dioxide doesn’t it, it’s part of the combustion process.
Matt
: But in general anyway could you use wave power or solar power, like wind turbines, these sustainable energy sources, recycling something we’ve unfortunately wasted away.  They need for instance like cars and things like that where…
Moderator: But do you think you travel sustainable or in a sustainable way, or…
Matt: Well I probably do more than most other people because as you say I walk.  So you know that’s kind of the answer to that, but I use some sort of buses, but as the gentleman to my left was saying about the buses, saying that in Weymouth because you get different spurts throughout the year, you’ll end up getting really small buses, which take five or six people like you say and then it gets to the other time of the year where you need a big bus and it would be common sense, but they don’t have any because they just think we’ll stick loads of little ones on and they get filled up and tend to drive past you if you’re three stops down the line from the main one.  You’re at your little stop waiting in the rain, 
Peter: It’s never easy to work out and while I said walking I forgot also cycling of course is also, it’s something that I keep telling myself I should be doing.
Moderator: To be honest what prevents you from doing it?  Is it just the convenience or your physical state?
Peter: I have a property with a drive that easily accommodates a car.  Not quite so easy to accommodate a push bike, you can, well it’s strange but it’s true. If you’re going to go to work and you can walk, you can put a coat on and an umbrella, but if you’ve got to get onto a wet bike and you’ve got paperwork it’s not so easy.  So that’s part of it.  There’s another aspect of it, is called laziness.  And I can’t deny that element.
Paul: I’m waiting for an ingenious engineer present company excepted of course, that comes up with some sort of cycle that you know, it doesn’t need necessarily to be motorised, but has kind of invented the radio, so that you can wind it up and off you go sort of thing.  
Tim: They do actually have them
Paul: Do they.
mark: There’s a bike that requires a certain amount of motion and I’m not sure what’s in it, but 
Matt: You know like a step through motorcycle where you…
Tim: It’s not a motorcycle, it doesn’t require any fuel, you pedal away and it kind of continues the motion, obviously you can’t get, I don’t know what the word is for continued motion, I don’t know.  So if you were to get to a hill you’ve cycled on the flat it will help take you up the hill. 
Matt: So it sort of charges the dynamo as you’re going and that helps you go up.
Tim: Yeah, and then when you go downhill it just sort of converts to manual so it’s sort of not wearing all the parts out and that sort of thing.
Moderator: To me in general it seems to me that you’re [63.57] there’s maybe some need for more sustainable travel or you don’t think so and if you think so why and if not also why?
Peter
: There’s a need for sustainable everything isn’t it, we’re on a hiding to nothing.  We really are.  And it’s like a cancer really, what do you do, you just carry on until you’ve gone, that’s what we’re doing, we’re in a lot of trouble.  But we’re not capable on our own of altering our lifestyle, one of us does it, no one else will and it’s not a subject to dwell on too long
Paul: Depressing isn’t it.
Matt: Isn’t there like a mono rail kind of system around overseas and people just get on like they would buses, yeah and then use wind power, right because like in Portland Harbour where they’re doing the Olympics, they was proposing to put in kind of wind turbines, but you can put them in the sea anyway and like where you’ve got these traffic lanes, like in the sea they can actually put something dividing them up so it wouldn’t make any difference.  And they’d have a huge, you’ve got like a monorail and it’s all run by wind you know.
Peter: Yes and it’s all whether you do it by converting to electricity because it’s a flexible thing you’ve got and there’s ways it can be stored and all the rest of it.  That’s fine.  The problem you’ve got is that even on the sort of scale you’re talking about you’re still not doing much more than scratching at the surface. But can we not work on one thing at a time?  Most, the vast majority 
Matt: but can we not work in one area at a time
Peter: well should do and there should be a bit less opposition to something like that, I think a well engineered wind farm looks good.  But it becomes so sensitive and there’s so much opposition.
Matt: Do you think that’s a lot to do with money being made from oil and things like that?
Peter: No I think it’s people fearful of change and people, it’s not fashionable to see a wind farm in good light.
Matt: You wont see it not right out in the channel somewhere, dividing up the actual lanes of traffic for the, because they’ve actually got almost like lanes haven’t they which they have to, you can’t go sort of south in this lane, you know you have to divide them up like a road.
Paul: I personally think, I echo your sentiments entirely, absolutely entirely and unless you’ve got forums, discussions, where you actually open it up to suggestions, then I think we all get very small worlded and very small minded.  So given all our own little worlds, when you talk about wind farms, wonderful idea but don’t put it next to my back garden for goodness sake you know and it’s a bit like that.  Don’t matter what the government or whoever wants to do, it’s a wonderful idea but we don’t want it.
Peter: A better example is nuclear power.  Because nuclear power is a no no, because of the fearful risk of an accident and all the rest of it, so what do we do, buy it in huge quantities from France where it’s all on the terrace, it’s just downwind from it, but we just,
Moderator: Not far from it.
Peter: But that’s sort of not generally thought of, if it’s known its
Paul: I mean unfortunately because I don’t have the same type of mind is this gentleman, an engineering type mind, but you know I’ve been locked away in theatres and a very secluded life really and whilst I agree the way we’re going it’s not sustainable, I mean food, fuel, you name it, it’s not sustainable and unless we get academics, universities and these sort of people all coming together and actually discussing it openly and coming up with sensible ideas, not air brain ideas, I mean some of it you hear coming out is ludicrous, but no good, sensible discussions and really getting together on this because that has to be the way forward, because the way forward with everyone using vehicles and everything, it’s certainly not sustainable.
Peter: We’ve developed this theme, because this was about transport wasn’t it and we’ve sort of extended it to talk about energy generally.
Moderator: That’s great because I would have done that anyway, so just [69.03] and then come up with it again, but I just want to first wanted to ask Tim, sorry, just finish your snack.  You in person, what encourages you to behave more sustainable, transport related?  So choose more, I mean you’re probably doing it anyway, but if you can think about it what would be necessary for you to change your behaviour, to a more sustainable travel way?
Tim: Well like you said I kind of feel that since I don’t have a car anymore that all my travel, is or as discussed if that’s what you want to call sustainable.
Moderator: Or maybe you could think about other people, you maybe know some people who use their car more often and if you think about them.
Tim: Yeah, a friend of mine, I was at his house the other day, he needed a little bolt for his bike, but the shop was down the road, he got in the car, drove down the road, you know it takes five minutes to walk down the road, he drove down the road and drove back again.  He wasn’t in a rush, just, that’s an extreme case.  Well apparently there was this thing in America where people, someone drove next door to a party, to their next door neighbours house.  But anyway.  I think it’s difficult to say because obviously different people have different needs, like my mum for example. She had a car accident when she was like [70.48], she’s got a bad back so if she walks for a long time you know it starts to give her trouble, so she would need a car even if she wanted, even though she does try and walk places and try and avoid using the car, it’s still kind of necessary unless she gets one of those little scooter things.  So I think, people say they need a car, possibly they could use a motorised scooter, like a battery powered scooter, but then they’re still, that’s got to be manufactured hasn’t it.  So I think it depends on, it’s a bit difficult to say, it depends on people’s personal circumstances which they feel is why they have to do it and obviously they do feel they have to do it.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks, Peter, can you think about things that could force people, or you in person to change behaviour to a more sustainable travel way?  What would be necessary?  I mean we’re not looking for?
Peter: Get rid of that aeroplane for a start.  And that will happen before too long, I can’t keep that up.  It’s never was a long term thing.  And beyond the discussions that we’ve had I don’t use a car very much, don’t do a high mileage.  I mean it’s been very high today for me because I’ve been to Cornwall, that’s rare, that’s once in two months perhaps.  And the odd visit, so it’s difficult to sort of see if rail transport was more available I would use that more, certainly.  It’s what you’d wish to be generally available rather than well actually it is.  We’ve just talked about public transport, I mean if we’re extending it to politics which we have done, I do think that sensible expenditure to the extent of more subsidy, and certainly for rail transport, we all benefit from rail transport, it takes, if more people use it, it takes traffic off the road, so even if you never go on a train you still benefit from it and for that reason it seems to me to make sense to subsidise it.  It’s an economic from an environmental point of view, it’s a more economic way of travel and it also has the advantage of being a damn sight safer.  So it’s got a lot going for it, so that’s what you’d want, rather than what I can see actually happening.  Other than that get a push bike, I’m sort of getting progressively more guilty that I haven’t got a push bike, as time goes on and that might tip the balance because I have had, I’ve had push bikes over the years.
Tim: Can I say also, I found since riding a push bike, you see a lot more, you’re more aware of stuff and it’s more pleasant as well.  I don’t know if there is a higher tax, but do you get taxed higher for a second vehicle or anything like that?  Is there like a higher tax for a second vehicle?
Peter: No it depends on the type of vehicle, rather than tax band.
Tim: Because you see everyone driving around in congestion, as far as your eyes can see it’s just one person in a car.  It’s difficult to just say well do this because obviously we’ve discussed this it’s not as simple as that, but I know they tried that car sharing thing, which didn’t really work, like a handful would do it, you see the signs it’s like 5000 people registered and it’s been going for I don’t know how long.  But some sort of enforcement instead of suggestions.  I think if they enforce things, I think that’s the only way to get it done because the people, including myself if I had a car that I could afford to run, 
Peter: You must have two people in your car, why have you only got one?
Matt: But I can’t see them doing it, you know what I mean.  There’s too many cars down this road.
Moderator: In the United States you have special lanes just for highly occupied vehicles and if you have more than two people in a car you can use these extra lane and if not,
Peter: We’ve got that here, bus lanes.
Moderator: Just for the bus.
Peter: Well yeah, but you’re talking about occupancy of cars I thought.  Well a car and a bus could be, so a large vehicle with a lot of people in has got priority.
Paul:  I don’t want to seem as if I’m agreeing with Peter on each and every time but, I would sooner give subsidies to rail by far than you know a so called public transport bus company, that’s neither organised, still congesting the road.  You know at least with rail, it’s taking vehicles etc off the roads, because you just can’t keep snarling everything up the way it is.  I mean I wouldn’t feel at all badly about giving more subsidies to trains.  Absolutely.
Moderator: I just want to bring up some more potential measures.  Maybe you’ve heard about these.  Let’s talk about road pricing, or congestion charging.  What do you think about these things? Does it work, how do you feel about that?
Paul: Well it just won’t work will it?  Until they come up with a better plan, because what they’re doing is punishing people for their incompetence, quite frankly.  It’s not my fault that they took so many years doing nothing and now suddenly oh, we’ve got a problem, we’ve got to resolve it, so what we’ll do is we’ll hit the poor car driver each time.  You know taxation, parking, fuel, in everyway possible and I don’t think that’s the answer, money should be poured in to come up with a solution to the problem.  Not just keep punishing people.  
Matt: Also there’s this thing about debt.  I heard that they’re making flights anyway a lot more expensive but then that becomes an exclusive club for people who can afford that, so one of the reasons why they wanted to lower the price was so that people could afford to go and enjoy themselves just as much as rich people.  So I was assuming that you know, though more people are taking them to travel they should still maybe just clean it up, you know find better ways of even making fuel better, in that sense, which would probably take money and a lot of time.  Within certain cities, they do this park and ride scheme in like Oxford, where you drive in, it doesn’t get congested in the centre and it kind of opens up the lungs of the centre and they sort of then can do better things, but whilst they’re still kind of.  I mean there’s other environmental issues where people will free up sort of green land what was initially green zones, I’ve forgotten what you call it now and there’s perfectly good housing areas, where they can kind of, you know which have just been derelict buildings for streets and streets on end which they can do things with and when they start building new parks, they can then build in proper transport sort of areas and things.
Moderator: I see.
Paul: Well like I touched on earlier, it’s a very good idea if it works, but now assuming I’m from out of Exeter, so I’m coming into Exeter and I want to go to the park and ride, there’s 2 park and rides, Mattford and Soudon, and Marsh Barton sorry.  But assuming I’m going to go to Marsh Barton and I’m coming from Newton Abbot, I’m going to Marsh Barton so I park my vehicle up because I’m conscious about the fuel and I want to do the carbon print and all the rest of it, so I’m going to catch a bus into see my friend that lives in Whitden.  But they won’t stop.  You’ve got to go all the way into the city centre.
Tim: Wouldn’t the park and ride go into the city centre?
Paul: No it passes, this is what I’m saying it actually goes through the, but you’re not allowed to get off anywhere, you’ve got to go from the park and ride into Exeter city and then catch a bus back to where you want to go.
Peter: The reason is the same reasoning that you’d have an express train.  You know they don’t stop at every station.  And so that’s the reason with the park and ride, you’re bound to get the odd one, if it’s more than the odd one there’s a case for stopping.  But otherwise you’re bound to get that anomaly aren’t you, you can’t avoid it.  
Paul: Yeah I mean I don’t know what the solution is to it.  I don’t want to sound as if I’m criticising all the time sort of thing, it just seems ludicrous that if you’re trying to save your carbon print and you come into Exeter, and you park up at Souton, or Marsh Barton that you have to travel all the way to the city to come ¾ of the way back to visit your friend.
Peter: It’s a sort of organisational anomaly that you’ll get with public transport and one of them is that people don’t like it.
Paul: And that’s why they won’t use it.
Peter: And that’s why they won’t use it.
Moderator: We’re a little bit running out of time.  I just want to bring up one more issue.  In general sustainable behaviour at home, what do you think this could be?  I mean let’s say we’ve got an environmentally friendly behaviour at home, what can you do to behave sustainable at home?  Can you think about some things maybe?
Tim: Just to do with in general, or travel?
Moderator: No nothing related to travel, just in your house.
Tim: Simple things like recycling obviously the main thing.
Moderator: Anything else maybe.
Paul: Well that’s all I can think of really is recycling, to reduce the cost of fuel, or you’re utility.  By just switching off you know when it’s not required, but...
Moderator: So you’re thinking about energy saving, maybe also water saving.
Paul: Energy saving bulbs etc. etc. yeah.  
Moderator: In general do you think these things are necessary to do at home or?
Paul: Well absolutely because of the very things that we’ve already talked about, it’s not sustainable.  In a minute it’s going to become unaffordable.  You know, or there’s going to be that pressure, because people won’t be able to afford to have it and you know it’s going to be out of their reach for some.  And I’m afraid gas and electric’s going the same way, so we’ve actually got to do something about it now and now is the time to act.
Peter: There’s lots of things that can be done.  There’s lots of scope, but there’s also dangers in it.  If you put double glazing and insulating and draft proofing and everything everywhere and you cocoon yourself in you end up with an unhealthy environment.  For me I would rather put up with it being cold, it was a time when you know if you’ve got a healthy female, you can take her to bed, get under the duvet and find a way of keeping each other warm and you don’t need heating for that!  And you know we get awfully quick to say we’re cold, and so put the heating on, the other thing to do is put another layer of clothing on.  And if you did a bit more of that then you’d still have a, but that’s the sort of thing to be healthy and to save fuel as well.
Matt: My mum just had like, they’ve got lagging in the roof anyway, they insulated the walls, but they found that they actually brought down some costs which for gas and electricity was about a third.  Just for the amount that they’d normally use, I mean in the summer they don’t tend to use, and my mum likes to [85.15] for the summer.  But obviously in the winter it gets a bit chilly on Portland and it’s blowing quite hard.  So you could wrap up in a big duvet like you say, but sometimes you want to be able to walk around your house, I mean some people just whack up their electricity so it’s kind of like roasting in the whole house, but generally just to keep alive and warm on a general level and they’re quite economic they say switch the lights off when you go out of a room and stuff like having the house like a Christmas tree.  So generally it is more to do with cost than anything else, it’s cost related than environmentally friendly, but if it can do both 
Paul: I’m relying on you students to come up with a suit that’s energy saving.
Tim: Yes, because we have all these things that we have at home which we feel we need, which we kind of have for comfort reasons and obviously everyone just wants to make life easier so they invent new things which take fuel and all this sort of stuff.  Just out of the conversation we’ve been having it’s almost the only one of the ways to like reverse something you’ve done, if you’re talking about reversing it is pretty much going backwards.  So obviously like when I said saving the planet and all that stuff, it was obviously fine as it was, but obviously people just want to make things easier, less work and that sort of stuff so they invent things, which make things easier and people appreciate it, but I think its got to a point where obviously things like cars and that, people need them now.  Whereas there was a point where we didn’t have cars and everyone was fine.  But obviously with like expansion of businesses, it comes back to almost sort of like just I want to expand, almost greed and that sort of thing.  They have like massive business empires where they, for the business to continue they need to have people travelling out.  So it’s almost maybe taking a few steps back and maybe, do you know what I mean and having a look how it.  
Peter: The difficulty is that this is the way profits are made and as soon as you start eking into profits it ain’t going to work.  And going back to the home, it is wise to have insulation, of course it is and if it’s done wisely you not only help to keep your heat in to keep warm in winter, but it’s also keeps the heat outside in summer.  But some of the schemes that are energy saving are fine for the winter if you’re taking for example thermal, what do you call it sun energy and you’re just making use of solar energy, making use of that. We’ve seen examples of that in the schools in Exeter, you end up in summer with them being unbearably hot and what do you end up doing then, putting chillers in, which use far more fuel than your winter heating does.  So just need to be a little bit more careful perhaps in that way.  We try to make ourselves environmentally friendly.
Moderator: OK.  Thank you very much.  The only last thing before I come around and give you your money, and by the way it was really an interesting discussion for me to and it’s always interesting to hear people talking about their travel behaviour issues and transport and that’s always.
Matt: I think some of the advantages are really good though, because like your computer must save so much paper for emails and it’s quicker.
Paul: It does work quicker so in 50 billion years time we’ll be saying I wonder what happened to ...
Peter: But that’s another aspect that 
: 
: Tape ends 89.12