Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Welcome everybody, it’s nice to have you all here and your contribution is very much appreciated.  As I said before, we are doing a research project on travel behaviours so this is a really relaxed discussion about everybody’s travel behaviour, its opinions…and don’t be afraid you can say something wrong or something like that because everything is important.    I just want to ask you that you let one person at a time speak.  I use a recorder but you don’t need to be concerned about data protection issues.  We have strong data protection rules and nothing is related to your name or something like that.  So, hopefully it’s okay that we have to record these things.  So, let’s just start.  As I told you in the first place, this session will be approximately 90 minutes, maybe a little bit longer, maybe a little bit shorter…we’ll see.  The first thing I want to ask you is a short introduction.  My name is Moderator.  I am a researcher here at Exeter University working in the Department of Geography.    If you could just say your name…first name is okay if you don’t want to say your full name…maybe what you are doing or what else you want to tell everybody
INTRODUCTIONS: I’m Sheila.  I work for Devon County Council.  Hi, I’m Dawn.  I’m retired now from Social Services.  I’m Jenny.  I work at Exeter College.  I’m Sandra.  I work for Social Services as well!   I’m Thomas and I’m an estate agent.  [Laughter and comments]  I’m Matt.  I’m a tree surgeon and landscaper.  I’m Tim.  I am a retired academic. [2:42]  I’m Simon.  I study physics at University.  I’m Karen.  I’ve just finished my English degree at the University.
Moderator: Thank you very much everybody!  First thing I want to ask you…don’t think too much about it…is to fill out this form just for you to reconsider your travel behaviour.  It’s just that you tell me one of your preferred modes of travel you want to use for different travel purposes and one…maybe an alternative.  If you don’t have one, that’s fine, too.  I will just ask you to fill out these.  [Distributes with general conversation and pause 3:48 through 5:49]  The first question is pretty much related to that:  in general, I’ll ask you which mode of transport do you generally use?   You can maybe use your notes for that.  And, one of the main questions I want to ask you is: are there major differences in the way you travel for different purposes?
Thomas: Well it’s generally car, isn’t it…surely that’s the first answer on most lips.
Moderator: So for you it’s mainly car?  
Thomas: Generally, yea.
Dawn: I, too, would say car for most things.
Sheila: For most things…with shopping, if you try…I sometimes do it by bus but then, you can’t carry too much.  
Matt: Mine’s car and walking, apart from going on holiday, which I prefer to fly.  Well, I actually prefer going on a boat but it’s so much easier to fly and, you know, you can get to better destinations quicker.  So, I put ‘fly’ and then ‘boat’…walking for shopping and drive as an alternative…leisure:  walking and driving…trips countryside:  driving…alternative cycle…and work ‘drive’…yea, gotta drive. 
Karen: I don’t know how to drive.  I tried and I’m not really very good [Laughter], so…It was really very expensive for my lessons and I went to kinda one of those ‘learn to drive in a sports car!’  It was the worst idea ever!  I’m like ‘this gear stick doesn’t work’…I’m like this small thing on a telephone book.  So, I’ll probably learn to drive maybe in the foreseeable future if they don’t completely run out of oil but for right now it’s generally, entirely walking other than I use the train about once a week to go to sort of maybe visit parents or go on a trip.  But, it’s very rare that I use anything other than my feet or the train.  
Sandra: I don’t personally but my partner drives so we use the car for shopping, leisure and trips.
Karen: But, even if I could drive and had anywhere to park and any money to buy a car or run it, then I probably would…but I don’t think.
Tim: I think most people who’ve bought a car, these days, you use it first and then any alternative is second best.  All my first options are a car but if I don’t have a heavy shop at hand, I’ll go into town by bus.  On holiday, businesses, I’ll go by plane or train.  
Matt: My preference is driving/riding motorbike, actually…because I’d rather ride a motorbike for fuel purposes now than drive a car, and it’s so much quicker in traffic.  I’d rather go pretty much any of those on a bike rather than drive.
Moderator: Do you have to travel a lot for work?
Matt: No, it’s mainly around Exeter but I can’t travel on a motorbike for work because I’ve got loads of tools and stuff.  I almost always take a trailer and that don’t work on a motorbike.
Jenny: I recently changed my shopping habits to work.  Where I work, they started to charge car parking for staff…£4 a day! [Background comments]  
Tim: It’s the same on this campus…you get an annual license if you come on this campus worth about £60 or £70 out of pocket.  
Jenny: Is that a year?
Tim: Yes
Jenny: If you live in the countryside and you have to travel by car to the college, it’s going to cost you £20 a week…that’s £80 a month, which is a lot!
Matt: That’s a joke…paying to go to work! [Laughter]
Thomas: Presumably you’re office is County Hall?
Jenny: No, I’m on [Hill Road] next to college campus.  
Thomas: Because, a friend of mine works in County Hall…I live on [9:48] Road and a couple of months ago it was free parking all the way down there…and then the Council brought in this thing you have to pay to park your car there and then at exactly the same time they then permitted the whole street…because a friend of mine used to work at County Hall but she would always park on my road and walk 5 minutes to work but now, you’ve got no option!
Jenny: No.
Thomas: You’re damned if you do and you’re damned if you don’t!
Jenny: Because I refuse to pay the £4 a day, we’ve changed our habits as a family.  So, I work part time so the mornings…the days I work, we all go to work and school together in the car and we have various drop-off points.  It’s very stressful getting ready in the morning.   
Dawn: And all out at the same time!
Sheila: Yea.
Moderator: Sandra, what about you?
Sandra: My car is essential for my job…just around Exeter.  But, I do do overtime in which we take out a group and we go…or we’re supposed to be 40 miles round trip but we do go further.  I tend to use the car most of the time but I try and walk if I can but usually time doesn’t allow us to walk…because I’m always running late.  	
Sheila: I use my feet or public transport unless I get a lift from someone else…because I don’t actually drive.  I actually managed to get an Exeter Bus Pass, which I just pay a small proportion for my personal use, not actually work…which is brilliant!   
Thomas: I live in London before and travelling on the buses up there was inconvenient but really cheap!  It cost you a quid to get from literally one part of London to another part of London…yet you do that in Exeter you kind of, by route so to speak, it’s 30 or 40 quid!  [Overlapping background comments] 
Sheila: I catch the bus home days I work and the buses have stopped doing…I used to be able to get a zone ticket, which was a pound and that’s stopped now.  It’s now £1.45 to go not really very far at all!
Thomas: How far is that…how far does it get you?
Sheila: It’s from the High Street to the [12:01] roundabout.
Dawn: It’s about 3 stops, isn’t it?
Tim: You’d think…we golden oldies have free bus passes from 9:30, however…you’d think we’d use nothing but…but 9:30 is actually quite late.   It used to be the local Golden Oldie pass started at 9 o’clock but in April it’s changed to be…you’ve got a nationwide applicable Golden Oldies pass.  I don’t know if the [12:39] in the city do a card but certainly in open areas.    But, most people would prefer top have their ‘local only’ bus pass starting at 9 o’clock because so much starts at 10…if you aren’t working… 9:30 is too late.  
Matt: They also try to stop you travelling when it’s rush time.
Tim: Yea, but I mean, after 9 o’clock, the rush hour has subsided.	
Thomas: Are buses actually full in Exeter?
Dawn: I’ve not noticed them.
: {Overlapping conversation]
Thomas: Do they actually get full?
Sheila: At 5 o’clock, I suppose.
Sandra: Yea.
Tim: I suppose at rush hour but I’ve never been on a bus that’s more than 2/3 full.  Like I say, I don’t travel at rush hour.
Moderator: Thank you.  I forgot to mention something.  Just for recording reasons, I would ask you to let one person at a time speak.
Karen: Sorry.
Moderator: No, no…it’s great, it’s great.  It’s always hard to balance because you want ongoing discussion and it’s hard to interfere if somebody reacts to something or adds something or something like that.  So, just keep it in mind but thank you very much!  It’s going great!  I’d would ask you to think about what you maybe like about the modes of transport that you use and what you maybe don’t like about it.
Thomas: Well, I think there are 2 easy answers, aren’t there…what you like is the convenience and what you don’t like is the cost!  I think everyone probably ought to speak on their own, of course, but I think that’s probably the general conception of it, really…extremely convenient but dreadfully expensive
Matt: And, driving can take ages…even in Exeter…rush hour its common.  
Jenny: I’ve been travelling to and from Torquay and sometimes it would take an hour to do 20 miles.  
Thomas: Yes, it’s horrible!  I’ve done that a lot of times, as well, and it’s an absolute pain!  
Sandra: If it’s over an hour or half an hour or somewhere in-between…it’s a big difference.
Karen: I take the train home to Torquay…well, to Paignton…once every week or two weeks because my parents and grandparents live in Galmpton, which is a small village between Paignton and Brixham…and it takes me hardly any time, like 50 minutes…even with a 10 minute stop in [15:31] and I can just sit there and read a book and I don’t have to think about anything.    What takes longer is it takes me longer, for like…and it costs about twice as much for the 3 or 4 mile journey from Paignton bus station to Galmpton Village than it does for the whole train journey so I just walk it now…like, if its sunny you just walk it.  The buses…I don’t know if they are so bad up here…but in the Torbay area it’s absolutely awful!  Its £4 for me to go 3 miles, £4 returns…it’s ridiculous!  Really, it’s the worst mode of transport ever!  
Moderator: Thanks, Karen…Simon, what about you?
Simon: I walk most places, to be honest.  I sometimes jump in the car with a friend for shopping trips and at the weekends and stuff.  I climb down in Dartmoor or on the coast somewhere so I normally jump in the car with a friend.  I use a skateboard quite a lot to get around…when it’s dry.  And, I hitchhike home…I live in Poole, my parents live in Poole so yea, I sort of walk out to the main roads out of Exeter and hitchhike back and forth…which I find really quite easy because it’s such a busy road on the A35.  Yea, I suppose those are my main forms of transport.  For me, I always think about how easy something is, how cheap it is.  Also, I always try to keep sort of an environmental consciousness about the way I travel as well…so, I try not to use a plane when I can…yea.  I’ve put off getting a car for that reason…and financial reasons.  
Moderator: Okay, thanks a lot!  
Tim: May I just make a point about cars…of course they are convenient but taking Exeter as an example, 30 years ago it took 5 minutes into town, you could do your shopping and 5 minutes I’d be home…I live up in Pennsylvania.  Now, the traffic engineers…send one all around the outskirts, around the gardens, around the houses…and it takes probably a minimum of 12 to 15 minutes to get from there to your destination.  So, the car is just being made progressively less popular…and I mean I’m even contemplating walking into town…I mean it’s downhill all the way  and it’s going to be time saving, even though it takes 20 minutes to walk to there.
Thomas: The hill to get home must be a nightmare!
Tim: Well, yes…but that’s where the bus comes into play! 
: [Laughter]
Sandra: I’ve been driving around Exeter for about 12 more years and I’ve noticed everything they do is to slow you down…traffic lights at every round about now, single lanes where it used to be dual, more pedestrian crossings…and they are putting in more now…speed bumps.  I used to take the routes without the bumps but now there are no routes without the bumps.  They wreck your car.  I’m sure they are doing it to get people off the road.
Tim: Yea, this is, in detail, what’s been providing the hold-ups to using your car.  Perhaps it’s a good thing that we should use cars less.
Matt: I’d much rather take a train, actually, than drive a long distance because it is so relaxing.  You can sit down and read a book, like you were saying…but just the price of that, as well!  It’s ridiculous!  It cost now…I think the minimum to get to London now is like 70 quid!
Jenny: They are doing away with the Apex, as well, aren’t they?  I actually drove to London the last time and I would much rather go by train.
Matt: I would!  I don’t like doing the long drive.  I had a bad accident on the M5 and it’s kind of put me off doing a lot of motorway driving.  The train is nice and relaxing but ridiculously expensive compared to the rest of Europe, you know!
Karen: I think the trains are really badly…the actual system for buying a ticket is really bad also.  I went to Edinburgh a couple of months ago and I was booking quite late and it quoted me £105…and it was £50 to fly but I thought ‘I don’t really want to have to get a train to Bristol and then fly…I’ll go to the station’.  I got a ticket at the station that day for £22!  And, it wasn’t advertised on line!    And, whenever you go on to the trainline.co.uk or to the National Express or whatever…there’s loads of different websites…they all quote you the same price.  Just go to the station…£22!  It was like 9 hours and it was awful…but still, I got there and I hadn’t had to fly!  It was cheaper and quicker and it was like…I just really think it’s a bad system.  And, it really puts people off public transport!
Thomas: And, it’s about the timing as well.  It’s like what you were saying earlier…I had to get up to London before 9 o’clock in the morning and to get the train it’s like £150 to do so!   Yet, I took the latter train, which got in about 20 minutes later…£60!  That saved me $90 so I turned up half an hour late for the meeting.  But, you do the maths…why on earth was I going to pay that!  It’s stupid!
Karen: You can’t use a Young Person’s Rail card before 10 o’clock, which is absolutely awful!  Because my parents live so close, in my first year I used to commute…like it was pointless, me spending loads of money on rent in the beginning.  And then it was like, sort of…if they caught you out…you could be sneaky and use a return ticket but if they caught you out, you get charged from your return ticket from the last time you were there…and then sort of like an extra ticket, which was like double the price.  In the end…I worked it all out and it’s cheaper to rent up here for like a half an hour journey!
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  I want you to think about…if your travel mode or a travel behaviour in general, changed over the last months or years?  If you re-considered…maybe for somebody, your circumstances or travel behaviour changed…what do you think?
Sheila: I think, as far as the car…although I don’t drive but my partner does because he has a company car…but he’s actually got a Prius, a Toyota Prius, which is a hybrid.  So, it’s a…the idea that it runs partly on electric.  That’s great!  It’s really quiet!  So, that’s been a change for us, the family.
Matt: How much cheaper is it?
Sheila: I can’t tell you that but it’s got this little thing at the front that shows you your ‘sat nav’ and all these various things…and it shows you how many miles per gallon you are doing, etcetera…you know, and you can sort of watch.
Thomas: Because, the battery kicks in when you are going slow it changes.
Sheila: Yea, that’s right…it charges up the battery so it’s brilliant…it’s really good, actually!
Thomas: When I was in Canada, all the taxi drivers in the city use those.
Sheila: There is one in Exeter as well…the green one.
Matt: The green car…the eco one, isn’t it!
Moderator: Thomas, did something change for you between the last months…weeks…years?
: Well, no.  The thing is, I have to use a car for work.  Like I say, I’m an estate agent so I have to drive from here to there.  You’ve got no alternative…you can’t hop on a bike, hop on a train, hop on a bus, etcetera…you have to use it.  So no, I know it’s sort of not environmentally sound to admit it but no, really not.  Apart from the cost of fuel, I now tend…if I hit a big hill, I’ll flip it in neutral and coast!  That’s about the only kind of change I’ve made!  [Laughter and joking]
Matt: Why not ride a bike or a cycle?
Thomas: I would but giving clients a lift in the rain…[Laughter and comments]
Sandra: But, if some estate agents are selling houses in their area, they can walk…so surely they should try to do that more.
Thomas: But, if you are a good estate agent, are you are going to be in the centre of town…because there aren’t houses in the centre of town.…
Matt: Typical estate agent…has an answer for everything!
Sandra: Do you pay to park?
Thomas: I get a car parking pass for the car parks in Exeter.
Moderator: Convenient!
Thomas: Very convenient!
Jenny: Can you use it in your own home, as well?
Thomas: Oh, hell yea!   		 [Laughter and comments
Moderator: I should change jobs!
Sheila: I have made a conscious decision to walk more.  I don’t live that far away from town so I’ll walk into town and perhaps bus back, you know, whereas ordinarily I would have taken the car.  We’ve got a ‘hail and ride’ bus service which goes down the road…which I would use more.    I would use it to get to work for example, but it’s like this gentleman’s point…it doesn’t start til 5 past 9…that’s the first one, which is too late if you’re working!  But you know, I will catch it on the days I’m not working, if I’m going into town, and walk back or something like that.
Moderator: So, why do you walk more?
Sheila: Ummm…because I’ve got the time because I don’t work all the time…so I don’t have a schedule so much to be thinking about.   And, just to sort of try and keep fit…yea!  And sometimes it’s more convenient because it’s just as quick to walk in then to park and get to where you’ve got to get to and all that sort of thing.
Tim: I can sort of notice a change but it’s a sort of qualitative one within driving…picking up on your point.  I mean, as of the last, what, 6 months, I probably drive one gear higher than I ever used to before.  But, I was a reader of a telegraph driving motorist advice column called ‘Honest John’ and he said one should never go higher than 3rd gear in town.  Now, a lady wrote in and said she uses 4th and 5th in town and his response was ‘nobody should buy a 2nd hand car from this lady!’  [Laughter]   It’s absolute nonsense because it was useful advice when I was riding in this car but it’s well running…if you are going downhill, why should you use 5th gear?!
Matt: And, it uses less fuel anyway!
Tim: It uses much less fuel…so, higher gears!
Matt: Higher gears save lives.
Moderator: Thanks a lot!  One additional question regarding that issue and if you’ll think about it…did the way you travel influence maybe the place where you live?  Did you choose your place of living regarding to your mode of transport?   If you use your car, can you move to certain places or is it the opposite way?
Thomas: I say it’s the opposite way…the places where you live would dictate your mode of transport but you wouldn’t dictate your mode of transport upon where you live.
 Karen: I don’t know…I definitely moved in to where I live because it’s close to uni campus and town.  My house is a dive, it’s absolutely horrible and the rent is way too high…but I can’t drive and even if I could, I have nowhere to park that’s anywhere that’s accessible to the university for students. I mean, there is some limited parking and sort of roads that…maybe some parts of Hall Road and Monks Road…there’s very limited parking but it’s ridiculous.  So, most students don’t have a car, I think, on this campus.     And so, I’m on Pennsylvania Road and its kind of…I could have gone further…to walk further but I know that I’m quite lazy in the mornings and all my lectures were quite early.  And I was like ‘Pennsylvania Road…have a quick look around…wicked!  That’s the exact road I want to be on!’  I signed it before I’d even seen my room and I’ve been there 3 years now because its so convenient, it is…it’s really so convenient!   It’s like 10 minutes to uni, 10 minutes to town, 15 minutes to work, you know, where I was working before.  And, it’s like even if I need to go and…I was looking at getting a job on Digby and Sultan, it’s like pop around the back of my road, Exeter Central Train, one minute…it doesn’t cost me anything because its one stop…and its like I picked that house exactly because of where it was and there are no redeeming features to the house otherwise…it’s literally falling apart!  
Simon: I think with a student house, though, you’re only going to be living there for a certain…like a short period of time.  You’re not going to be making a purchase or anything so the quality is negotiable.
Karen: The quality of my house is bad!
Simon: I’m living, next year, a lot further from where I’m living now.  I’m moving to Monks Road next year and contemplating getting a bike but that’s the only sort of change I can foresee coming up.  I’ll probably walk most of the time…hopefully cycle!
Dawn: I did tend to use the car just about for everything to go into town because parking was cheaper than the bus fares at that time!  Then, when I got my free pass, I don’t take the car anymore! I travel for nothing!   
Matt: I’m actually looking to move at the moment and the only thing that the new place has got to have is parking…because I’ve got to park my truck somewhere.
Moderator: Well, it’s good that you have an estate agent!
: [Laughter]
Matt: Apart from the fact that he tries to sell one to me!
: Sandra?
Sandra: Could I just say my boyfriend’s actually had to move because he’s just lost his driving license?  So, he had to…he was forced into moving or else he would have no job.
Moderator: Closer to his work?
Sandra: No, close to where a colleague lives so he could get a lift.  As long as he is working with the colleague, he can go wherever he goes.   So, it was a very costly mistake…speeding!
Thomas: Speeding, really?
Sandra: Yea, too many points!  And, he’d lived in London for 9 years and had never been caught speeding.  
Matt: That’s because he drives fast…physically impossible!  [Laughter]
Tim: Speeding is just a further tax.  I mean, I feel sore about this because just last month going through North Umbria I was done twice for going 35 miles per hour in a 30 mile an hour zone and 36 miles per hour in another one.  Perhaps they are being safe because there are a series of villages there.  The A367 is clearly a great tax gatherer for North Umbria!  That’s 6 points, I think, and £120. 	
Karen: You do wonder with speeding if it’s whether you just know where you are.  Because, my dad, my granddad and my bother all ride motorbikes and it would be utterly pointless if they stayed within the speed limit.  But, when I’m on the back of it, it’s kind of like ‘rrrrrr’ and la-di-dah…pass the speed camera…that’s just because they know.    My dad said, especially on a motorbike, you have to be really far more aware so I can see that he’s spotted it from like a mile off.  He’s got like an intercom in the helmet and he’ll be like ‘I’m going to slow down in a little bit’ and then he’ll go like ‘rrrrrr’.  It’s just sort of like…it just makes you wonder like is it just for people who know the area and does it really work to cut down on any deaths.  And for 5 miles up or below, should they really like…ticket you for that?
Thomas: Hairspray on the number plate.
Moderator: Shhh…we’ll erase that later!  [Laughter and comments]  Slight change of topic only…I would ask you to think how often do you go on holidays and what are your preferred destinations and how do you prefer to get there?
Matt: Yea, most go the quickest and most convenient way, don’t you…fly!
Moderator: It depends…if you go to Cornwall, its maybe a problem if you want to fly!
Matt: You can still fly to Newquay!
Moderator: That’s right…ok!  Jenny, what about you?
Jenny: I’d probably like to take 2 holidays this year.  One was to New York so not much option but to fly.  And then, we’re off to Portugal and we’re taking the boat!   Going down to North Spain and then going through.
Matt: Taking the boat or going in a boat?
Jenny: Taking the boat down to Santander and then driving through Spain to Portugal.
Karen: Did you just choose to do that so you could drive when you got off the other side of the boat or was it just because you wanted to take the boat?
Jenny: Because we want to go to Portugal…and then we looked at how we could get there and then weighed out the different…cost of flight plus hire a car or boat and take your own car on the rest of it.  But no, not much decision making went in to how we were going to get there.  It was just a question of the economics of it, really.
Moderator: Dawn, what about you?
Dawn: Again, I’ve got a holiday booked for New York this year so obviously it will be flying.  But, most of my holidays are in Europe so I tend to fly to those places.  As long as it’s hot, I don’t mind where it is!
Moderator: I’ll ask one question here.  You mentioned going to Europe a couple of times…do you travel differently when you are there than you do at home?
Dawn: Yes, definitely.
Moderator: What changes?
Dawn: I do tend to walk a lot and the local transport, once I’ve sussed it out.
Moderator: Why…is it different?
Dawn: Well yea…because you never know quite where you are going.  We were in Turkey once and the fares were ridiculously low.  When I opened my wallet to pay, the driver snatched my hand full of money so I was very cautious after that!  I kept it in my hand!  [Laugh]  You learn by experience.
Moderator: Sandra, do you go on holidays sometimes?
Sandra: I went abroad twice last year to New Zealand, which is obviously a long flight…and to Morocco, which was a flight as well.  This year I’m just going to Festivals on holiday so it will be the car.  But, if I was going away and it wasn’t abroad, then I would probably using public transport…train…just nice to leave the car at home, really.
Moderator: So it’s more convenient to just use public transport when you are on holiday?
Sandra: Well, maybe not more convenient…just for a change, really, because it’s a novelty!
Sheila: It’s a time issue, though, isn’t it?  You’ve got more time on holiday to do things and you see different things along the way which may be culturally interesting where perhaps on the way to work in [35:51] there’s not much to see and take in.  [Laugh]
Moderator: Simon?
Simon: My sister moved 2 years ago from Bournemouth, where we lived all our young lives, and she’s moved with her husband to the middle of nowhere in Scotland.  It’s about an hour from Fort William and we were, at first, quite worried about how to get up there because it’s like £200 if you want to accommodate on the train.  You can get it a bit cheaper than that.  One time I managed to get the coach.  We got 2 coaches that would take us to London and then London to Glasgow and they were £1 each if we booked it with [36:33] Mega Bus. [Laugh]  But, it was hellish…it was really horrible!  I think it was like 17 hours on the coach that day because we went Glasgow to Fort Williams, which was another 4 hours, on another local bus…and that was more expensive than the other 2.    But, we’ve actually found that from…I called myself formally environmental…but from Bournemouth airport, they do these flights for basically free to Glasgow Prestwick.  I think the maximum my family has ever paid is £30 for a ticket but more often you can find them for £10, £5…I think my sister has come down for £0.99 a couple of times with the kids.   That is just convenience…it’s just an hour and then 4 hours by bus.  It cuts out sort of a 17 hour bus journey.
Tim: It’s interesting that this is the first mention of using coaches for inter-city travel, really.  I used to use coaches to London and elsewhere but I found the time keeping so appalling that you really couldn’t plan your day.
Karen: The advantage of taking the train is that you avoid the traffic and it’s like if you are taking the coach then you’re not doing it anyway.  And, it’s the same principals as in a car…you can’t read a book.  If you get carsickness, anyway, you can’t read a book or you don’t get a significant amount of space to relax.
Matt: Yea, they are uncomfortable…buses are uncomfortable.  They could be really comfortable.  I’ve done 18 hour trips in Thailand and it’s been a really comfortable bus…blankets on you, absolutely fine…no problem.  But, English coaches are just rock hard seats…they’re uncomfortable…they are cheap, that’s what it is…they are cheap coaches!
Moderator: So it’s just about the price.  So, where do you travel for holiday?
Matt: Ummm…
Moderator: Thailand, you mentioned.
Matt: Yea…I’ve done quite a lot of long haul travelling…Australia, Thailand…yea.  I’d like to go somewhere completely different for my holiday.  I like complete culture shock, you know.  So I tend to go to sort of more random places and they tend to be further away.    I’ve spent 3 weeks driving around the South of France.  Yea, I take quite a few holidays there…as many as possible!  I try to do sort of 4 a year if I can, even if it’s just a week.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  And in general, do you think your holiday travel changed during the last couple of years…4 or 5 years?  So if you think back, did it change compared to today?
Karen: I think…I don’t know if its just the point of view of me studying or from air travel, I haven’t been able to afford, so far, to go on holiday during most of my sort of young teenage life and then throughout university.    And now, all of a sudden, flights are so cheap!  I’m going to Poland the day after tomorrow because my flight was like less than £20 to get there.  So, I thought for less than £20 and its so cheap to stay out there…it’s getting a little more expensive now that the economy is picking up…but it was so cheap to stay out there a week!  It’s actually cheaper for me to get that flight, go to Poland, spend a week there than to go to Cornwall, to Newquay or to visit friends in Edinburgh!    
Matt: Or to even stay in Exeter!  [Laughter]
Karen: It is!  It is way cheaper…it’s actually way cheaper than my rent!  So, I thought ‘just do it!’ and I bought tickets!  And, my sister booked about a week after and I got mine for just under £20 and she got her flight for £3.99!  It’s just kind of like they just have to have the plane full!    And now I’m kind of getting that little, oh, carbon footprint guilt…I just bought it because it was cheap!  I didn’t think I would ever be able to fly within the country…I would feel too bad about the environment because you can get other transport and it might be inconvenient and it might make you feel rubbish …and if I was a business person and I had a trip, I would probably forget about worrying about carbon footprint guilt, but I don’t so I can’t do it.    So, I don’t think I would ever fly within the country but abroad, definitely!  It’s so cheap!  I mean, I’m flying to Mexico in September and when I first checked the flights it was like £800.  And last year, it was close to £2000…and I got them for £600!  And, it’s still a lot of money but it really doesn’t make sense to me.  Oil’s going like this [Gesture] and flights are going like that [Gesture] and I’m just wondering when it’s going to crash out. 
Dawn: I would fly in the country.  I used to travel up to Liverpool quite frequently by plane.
Karen: From Exeter?
Dawn: Yes…but they stopped it now so it’s back to the car.
Karen: Was it a lot cheaper than driving?
Dawn: Yes, it was about £37…and you’re talking about, what, £100 up and down in a car.  
Moderator: So you had to change because they stopped the service.
Dawn: They stopped the service.  I don’t know why because it was always very well subscribed to.  
Tim: I’d be surprised if almost everybody didn’t use flying much more frequently in the last few years because of cheap prices.  I would also be surprised if this persists for long because they say that the small airlines are going to close down…or suffer, anyway, because of the cost of fuel. 
Sheila: We tend to look on Exeter to see what ‘Flyb’ flights there are in Europe and if there’s something good, go for it, really!
Matt: Exeter Airport is a blessing!
Sheila: Yea!
Thomas: I’m just scared of flying!
Moderator: Are you?
Thomas: I hate the idea of it.  It’s not right is it, these big metal objects!
Sheila: How do they stay up there?!
: [Laughter and comments]
Moderator: So what is it for you, for holiday travel…what do you use?
Thomas: There isn’t really any specific way, I would say.  I mean I haven’t been on holiday, I would say, for years really!  I take time off and just go around the country and sort of see friends from where I used to live!  So generally, I guess if you break it down, it’s either car or train.   But if it is abroad then yes, it’s going to be a plane.  It’s just the convenient, cheaper way of doing it. But, I’m not the type of person who will just fly off here, there and everywhere because I just hate flying!  Something scares me about it.  But, that’s a different type of [43:32]!  [Laughter and comments]
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  I have to bring in another issue.  We sometimes use the term ‘sustainable travel’.  What do you think this is…what is sustainable travel to you?  Can you understand it or…anybody?
Thomas: Well, it’s like 2 people in a car rather than 1 person, isn’t it something like that?  ‘Buddy-ing’ up and lessening the impact.
Moderator: Ok.  Anybody else?
Tim: Well, it’s probably transport much more greatly subsidised and I think it would be much better conforming to be sustainable travel.  But I mean on average, costs would have to come down by factors for this to come about.  It might actually have to happen in due course.
Matt: Or, you have bus drivers have change for a £10 note actually on the bus in the first place!  ‘I can’t change that mate…you’ll have to walk!’  [Laughter]…ok!
Moderator: Again, inconvenience.  
Matt: I’ve got money but he can’t break it.
Moderator: So you think using public transport is more sustainable than other ways of travelling?
Tim: Well, it depends on what you mean by sustainable.  If it’s subsidised…if it’s heavily subsidised, then people are going to use it.  This might be sustainable…I don’t know.
Sheila: Also, living in Pennsylvania…after 6 o’clock at night, I think the bus is only once an hour!  So, if you want to go into town for any reason in the evening, you almost have to take a car…or why should you…
Dawn: You’re stranded.
Sheila: Yea…which is really annoying!
Tim: What I thought is an ideal means of public transport…this was Communist Russia…there used to be these mini-vans, I don’t know, perhaps taking a dozen or a dozen and a half people.  And, it had a general route but you could normally, if you wanted to go off it a block or two, the bloke would drop you there.  But, it only worked because people had so few cars; therefore, it was essential to have, you know, a fairly flexible public transport system and it was jolly good but that’s a bit archaic, perhaps.    
Matt: I think cars that are made are generally unsustainable because…well, unless they are run on different fuels, aren’t they…because the fuel’s not sustainable.  That’s the point. 
Thomas: [46:24], wasn’t it.  That made the front page of the Sun Newspaper!
Moderator: Every newspaper, I think.  
Matt: You know, run your cars on rubbish and you’re laughing.
Karen: I think it depends on what they mean by sustainable.  I think this is another one of those jargon terms.  They could call it Eco-Travel but sustainable travel is so hard to define.  I mean, they’ve had bio-fuel since like…it’s been in effect since the late 1980’s or something?    But, you need to heat the fuel up to a certain temperature and it costs a couple of hundred pounds to put the heaters in.  You need to run the car on a little bit of petrol before it will kick into bio-fuel.  So they say it just wasn’t worth putting the money in making them systemised.  So, you could say like…you could implement that in everyone’s car and then it would be the entirely sustainable but you don’t hear about it…you hear about ‘take the bus’, take the…you know, all of this.  If you think about what’s truly the only thing that’s sustainable, its walking or bicycle.    And so, it’s hard for them…I don’t know why they don’t just call it Eco-Travel or More Green…’sustainable’ to me seems like a wrong term.     
Matt: People are never going to stop using their cars.  People need cars…that‘s one thing that isn’t going to happen.  People aren’t going to stop using cars.   
Thomas: I think it’s the word ‘sustainable’ just so the government can still tax you.
Karen: I think its just like a nice little pat on the back and it makes me think…I can understand if they said ‘you’re more green if you do this’ but if you say ‘if you take the bus it’s sustainable travel’.  It’s not sustainable travel because the oil is still running out.    If you wanted to sustain it, you’d be implementing, you know, the rapeseeds oils and stuff like this…but they don’t want to put the money into it.  They don’t want to put the funding into it.  It’s funding for research and implementation.  They are not going to get it from the public.  They don’t want to put the money into it so it’s not going to happen.    So ‘sustainable’…the term ‘sustainable travel’ makes me a bit angry because it’s just like…I think it’s tricking the general public if you say ‘if you get on that bus, it’s sustainable’.  It’s not sustainable!  So I think ‘Eco’ or ‘More Green’ maybe…or ‘You’re helping the environment’…but people aren’t stupid.  You shouldn’t just call it a term that’s going to make them feel better.  
Moderator: Ok.  Interesting.
Tim: In view of that clarification, probably if everyone used public transport it would probably be less unsustainable!  Less consuming.
Karen: Yes!  [Laugh]
Thomas: And the thing is, you can’t take normal cooking oil and put it into a diesel engine and the car works perfectly. [Overlapping comments].  A friend of mine did it for years and his car did eventually blow up!  [Laughter].  
Dawn: What he saved, probably!
Thomas: What he saved was immense!  
Dawn: I can remember years ago my husband saying ‘I’m going to have diesel…its so much cheaper!’  He’s still running around in a diesel car and he can’t afford to run the wretched thing because it’s so expensive.
Thomas: A friend of mine uses [49:09] because he can…but when he gets caught, he’s going to be in trouble.  
Karen: That’s the thing, as well…you’re going to get taxed on it!  I remember I used to have this really tight wad boss.  I used to work in a chip shop.  And, he had one of these systems put in and he had access to all this old chip fat.  He’d filter it through and run his car on it.  And he’d say ‘oh, girls…hush, hush…don’t say anything about this’.  Because, he would have been taxed more on that system than running his car on petrol!    And I thought this was like…I couldn’t believe it, that he had to hush-hush down his wicked environmental use of his old chip fat!  
Simon: The car’s system is not made to burn that kind of fuel and it’s made to…the catalyst and stuff is made to capture a lot of…sort of bad chemicals and emissions.  So when you run chip fat…my friend was running vegetable oil and it smelled like a chip shop, it smelled great!  [Laughter]  But, the black smoke that was pouring out of his jeep was unreal. 
Karen: So, its worse for your carbon footprint and you’re saving oil.
Simon: Yea, it’s terrible.  I think if everybody used chip fat in their cars, the roads would be black and they’d have to be cleaned all the time.  [Comments and Laughter]
Tim: Could I make the point that if you run your car on excess, used chip oil it’s actually illegal unless you pay fuel tax on the purchase of fuel!  [Laugh]  Let me not discourage anybody from using chip fuel!  
Moderator: We don’t know anything about that!  [Laughter and comments]
Thomas: The thing for me, obviously, in my salary every month I get paid a petrol allowance which I then get taxed on.  I then go to put petrol in my car, which I get taxed on again…and it’s just, you know…well.    If the government wants us to kind of reduce this carbon footprint, all they need to do is put a big fat mirror in front of themselves and take a look at actually ‘oh, we’re the ones that can do it, rather than anyone else!’…because it’s going to cost them a helluva lot of money because we can’t do it ourselves…but that’s never going to happen, is it?
Moderator: Okay.  Maybe you can contribute by taking part in this discussion!  Yea, sometimes there is a gap between science and political government.
Sandra: I think that they should have to live in the country or be a farmer or have animals to have a 4x4.  
Jenny: Yea, definitely.
Sandra: You shouldn’t just be allowed to take kids to school in a 4x4.  You should have mud on it, that’s what it’s for!
Thomas: They should have the proper use for one, really.
Sandra: Exactly…so you shouldn’t be able to just go and buy one, you should have to prove you needed it.
Karen: I think the government has to question, as well, if they put money into sustainable travel, will people use it?  Like, if public transport…if buses…you don’t have to use it for business…if buses were on time and wicked and comfortable and cheap, would you guys stop using your cars?
Sheila: Probably.
Karen: If you wouldn’t, then there’s really no point.  But if you would, then I think that’s really positive and that’s something we can be doing now. Because let’s face it, public transportation, especially around Exeter, is rubbish.
Matt: Well, I think the whole country…we are the only country in Europe that has the worse public transport and that’s known to everyone.  If you go anywhere else in the world, public transport is great but come to England and it’s bloody diabolical.   
Karen: Like you’re saying, in the cities it’s a lot better so why down here in the countryside do we go badly?  I think if we had more things like this where…I don’t know if this is going to go back to the government or anything but if they knew that people would actually stop using their cars…or would use their cars significantly less…if public transport was actually wicked, if they would just pile a couple of billion into it, then that’s actually something positive.  But, I think right now people have the attitude that people wouldn’t stop using their cars…like it doesn’t matter how good public transport is.  And I think that’s underestimating people!  I think if public transport was really good and on time and cheap, we would use it more.
Moderator: Okay.  
Sheila: But you know, you’ve never ever really asked, are you?  There’s no sort of City Council survey that comes to your door or is put in with your council tax.  You know, going through your sort of travel and transport routines and so on.  And, you tend to think that it’s a bit of a fact packet type exercise whereby ‘well, we’ve got our bus service so we’ll do this and we’ve got car parks and we’ll do this’.  Until today, I’ve never really been party to any sort of properly planned out or any sort of survey or census about travel to work patterns or anything like that.  You know, this isn’t an issue that arrived yesterday; this has been an issue which has been ongoing for the last…well, before global warming it was just congestion.  It’s been ongoing for what, 20 or 25 years?  So, I tend to think well, what’s the City Council doing or Devon County or…?  You know, you see the odd sign on the back of a bus like ‘car share’ and things like that but you know, we should be having things like cycle schemes; we should be looking at trams and all sorts of things!    I just don’t get the impression that anything really innovative is going on and there is no sort of investment in transport.
Thomas: They are reaping the taxes of it.  
Matt: Entirely… they are making so much money off of the fuel its almost…you know, there is a conspiracy theory there that the government actually wants…they probably don’t give a toss, do they? They are making so much money off of the fuel…it’s the same as the cigarettes.    It’s true though… cigarettes, alcohol, fuel…you know.
Karen: But, surely it must be proportionate because if they are having to buy the fuel from other countries and other companies, if the prices go up the taxes inevitably have to go up.  Does the government actually make more money from increased taxation or is it proportionate to what they are having to spend to get it?  Because, I don’t know if they do want…
Thomas: They spend it on the private jets to go over to conferences and on private hotels, have the chauffeurs, have the bodyguards, etcetera…which is where a big proportion of the tax actually goes.    They are there on a Saturday drinking their Hennessy Richard Brandy and actually getting nothing done at the end of the day…apart from their [55:43] ‘oh, we’ve done this’.  [55:49]  [Laughter]
Moderator: Sandra?
Sandra: I can’t think of what to say!  [Laughter]
: It’s hard to follow that statement!  That’s ok.    You brought up a couple of things.  I think someone mentioned public transport and improvement of public transport to change their travel behaviour…to make it more convenient for them.  Is their anything else you can think about…some improvements or what would attract you to behave more sustainable…or let’s say ‘environmentally friendly’ related to transport?     
Thomas: Self-sufficiency in looking for alternatives…there’s always got to be an alternative in to it.  And, I just think people should look more into that because there will be an option there and it may not be as lucrative to the government nor [56:42] political in all of this.  But, there are other options out there and I think people should just look into that and just make that more sustainable rather than just shipping stuff in and pushing stuff out. You know, England just use everything we can actually strain or source from the country in a sustainable fashion.    And, I think there is an answer there!  I mean, don’t ask me…I don’t know what the answer is [Laughter and comments].  But, surely there is something there that can be done, really.  
Jenny: Going back in time to how people used to live…buy locally, horse and cart…
Thomas: Damn straight…damn straight…completely!
Jenny: Grow your own veg.
Thomas: You walk around Tesco or wherever and its tomatoes from Kenya, asparagus from Spain and blah, blah, blah.  
Tim: Oranges from South Africa.
Thomas: Exactly!  It’s just a shame not to grow within a 10 mile radius of here…which you can get…but you’ve got to go to your nice little deli’s and blah, blah, blah…and you pay 10 times over the odds.  
Jenny: It’s up to us not to buy it, though…buy what’s in season. 
Thomas: Yea, it is but it needs everyone to do it…to make the supermarkets actually [Overlapping comments].
Jenny: But then that’s the problem, the attitude…’why should I bother, no one else is going to?’   If people think like that, nothing will change.
Tim: Increasing fuel costs are going to cut down on the amount of food that is worthwhile to transport between countries.  I mean, it’s going to be costly in due course.  I mean, years ago you didn’t get this because it was costly…transport has become very cheap and so in the last few decades you get international fruits.  
Thomas: Well, no…the EEU has just backed down on its regulations…like cucumbers and how much they can bend…irregular shaped fruit.  Because you know, the last couple of years that was all banned.    If you had an orange it had to be a certain size…cucumber could only bend 1 centimetre per every God knows what!  Well, a couple of days and ‘scrap that’.  You can buy normal fruit and veg…like you get a slightly wonky banana or a wonky cabbage or something.  But, if you want a perfectly coiffured one, you pay a little bit more for it.  You know…’Bang on!  That’s the way it should be!’  Who cares!  It’s frustrating.  So, I think that’s [59:02].  
Moderator: Okay.  Jenny, you said you stopped buying…
Jenny: I stopped buying things like ‘flown by air freight’ vegetables.  You know, so instead of…in Tesco the left hand side of the aisle is asparagus, sugar snap peas, baby corn and baby this and baby the other.      You know, I buy cabbage…and its 70 pence!  And, it’s come from down the road, hopefully…and it’s amazing what you can do with a cabbage!  And so yea, that’s what I’ve started doing.
Matt: I think they’ve actually started putting that on the packet, how far its come!  
Jenny: Yea, a little blue sticker!
Karen: Oh, yea…I didn’t notice that for quite a while and then its like ‘oh, this is air’.  I think it’s quite a good idea but then the sticker itself doesn’t look negative…it looks quite jolly and positive.  And, I was wondering ‘why have they put this on here?’  It’s not making me not buy it.  
Sheila: And then there’s the other argument:  by not buying orange or peas that come from Kenya…which is sort of sustaining a developing country…you think ‘oh, my God!’.   There are too many ethical issues to think about!
: I don’t know about that because I think if you did want to sustain a developing country that none of those peas are going to the people that need them in that country.  They are all coming to Tesco’s in England!    The only thing that I have a problem with is…well, you go [60:28] and it’s really reasonable…and it is really reasonable for what you get.  It is all organic and you get loads but other then that, if you buy stuff that’s in the country and hasn’t been transported, I don’t understand why it costs so much more…like it does!  I bought a pack of strawberries…it was Kent strawberries and I was thinking ‘oh, it’s not only from England, it tells you where they are from’.  And, they were twice the amount of the basic strawberries from Spain!  
Thomas: Just as juicy, isn’t it.  It’s the same as tobacco.  Everything is packaged… [61:03] is packaged in England yet you buy it from the corner shop and you pay £12 a packet….buy it from your mate who just got back from Spain and you pay £4.50 and it all ends up from the same factory   
Tim: But, quite a lot of home grown vegetables…less fruit, I suppose…but it has to be in heated greenhouses, certainly during the cold months.  Spain and places like that don’t have to spend the fuel costs so things from overseas can be cheaper because of that.
Karen: I think this is a good thing about getting an in-season box but we were just talking about this the other day…how hard it would be to actually live off of things that are only in season.  And, not just that but only would have been grown in England.    I mean, it would be really difficult…I mean, I think we try our hardest but it’s still like…it’s hard!  Nowadays you can get chillies and peppers and stuff that’s grown in the UK but like Tim was saying, how much energy has gone into that?    And, I think it’s a bit of a…I think its always going to be a bit of a catch 22 with being green.  I think you’ve just got to use your common sense.  But, it would be nice to have some like proper education that’s not biased or mud slinging about people who aren’t green enough and people that attack each other.  It would be nice to just have like ‘this is how far this has flown’ and ‘this is what uses the most energy’.  I don’t think there’s enough education about it, really.  
Moderator: Thanks!   Let’s just get back one step regarding your own travel behaviour…or lets think about [62:37] measures.  I mean some measures they try to force people to change their behaviour.  And, I just wanted to ask you about measures like road pricing or congestion charges.  What do you think about these?
Thomas: Criminal!
Moderator: Yea?  Why?
Thomas: Because, you already pay for road tax.  You pay a huge extortion on petrol that goes to the government to use on the roads.
Dawn: It’s just another tax, isn’t it?
Thomas: You pay your fee at MOT.  You pay your road taxes.  Like I say, it’s wrong…completely wrong…completely, utterly wrong.
Matt: But, it’s done a good thing in London.  
Thomas: Well, yea…but then the people that maybe need to use those ways of transport up there can afford to do so.  I used to work in London and used to have to pay congestion charges…and it was great because where you wanted to go, you could get there so much quicker, you’d get more jobs done in a day!   I was a sparky up there and you made a fortune doing that!
Matt: A friend of mine who’s a tree surgeon in London actually said it worked really well for the first…I don’t know how long it’s been going, the congestion charge in London?  
Thomas: About 2 1/2 or 3 years.
Matt: He reckoned that it worked well sort of the first year but now his company, at least…and probably everyone else…has just priced it all into the jobs that they price for so, it’s actually gone back to normal now for most people, you know.
Thomas: Manchester is just about to bring it in as well, isn’t it?
Sheila: Yea.
Thomas: Also…is it Leeds…also another town.
Tim: Aren’t they being clever about it, now that they are applying congestion charges for travel at rush hours?
Thomas: It is…and only Monday to Friday, I think I what it is.  So, you can still do it Saturday and Sunday and I think before 8am and after 6pm or something.  So at least you’re sort of freeing up the city at that time of day.
Tim: However, I think midday travel is not hit by congestion charge.
Thomas: No.  
Tim: I don’t know how they are going to work it.  I mean, they run this in Singapore but they are very sophisticated.  If you are going to run the congestion charge, you’ve got to have a little broadcast apparatus and there’s a machine out there that clocks you in and you get a bill for your congestion charge.
Matt: It’s entirely the same in London.
Tim: Is that how it’s run?
Matt: Yea…registration plates.
Thomas: Or, you can just drive through if you just phone them up and say ‘here’s my registration, my debit card’ and there you go!  If you actually get through the automated service and they understand you correctly!
Moderator: Okay.  How about you…what do you think?
Jenny: I don’t know…I’ve never used on.  Having said that, you go abroad and you go through France and Spain…it is péage on tolls and the motorway in America is the same…and you don’t think much of it, really.    I suppose it’s a cultural thing, isn’t it…as it becomes further embedded, you get used to it and you just think of it as a different tax…  And, you have got the choice of using it or not, I suppose.
Matt: The thing I’ve found in France was they are actually really easy to avoid.  You can actually pull off the road relatively easily and bypass them.  So even…whether you pull back on to the road or go a different route…you know, I don’t know if they are just trying to stop people from using the main roads or whether it’s to slow people down, but they are quite easy to avoid.  
Moderator: I mean you’re obviously slower on the smaller roads…if you can’t afford it, you can just save it maybe.  That’s maybe how it works.  Ok, just one additional question regarding…I don’t want to use ‘sustainable’ anymore! 
Karen: Sorry!
Moderator: No, it’s ok, it’s ok!  Regarding ‘environmentally friendly’ transport, do you think that…if you think about measures to encourage people to change their travel behaviour to a more environmentally friendly way, do you think you should also force people to change their holiday travel and maybe ask them to change their destinations or reduce their number of holidays or flights?
Thomas: That’s not going to work, is it!  That’s like it’s too much dictatorial…I think, anyway.
Moderator: So, it wouldn’t work for you anyway?
: Oh, hell no!   If I was intent on going somewhere and someone says you can’t go there, I’ll then be thinking ‘well, sod you…I’m going to go there!’   
Matt: Holidays are holidays, you know…although it’s a catch 22 because flying is the worst form of, you know, pollution that there is.  But, it’s also the thing that you’ve looked forward to most of the year and you don’t really get to do that often.  So, it’s quite hard.
Karen: If you fly for a long trip and then you don’t drive for the entire trip as well…I know it doesn’t balance out but it balances out a small amount, at least.  I mean, if you’re going to stay at home and go somewhere in the country and drive for maybe 5 or 6 weeks and then go somewhere else…you’re not driving, you’re backpacking, it does offset it a small bit I suppose.  I depends if you drive when you get there.
Thomas: But nobody thinks like that, do they!
Matt: No, because they are on holiday!  [Laughter]
Thomas: Who, caution to the wind!  How about an extra glass of white wine!
Sheila: I do feel that a holiday maker is made to feel guilty but I assume…perhaps wrongly… that a large majority of people who travel do have business.  And, I’m sure in this day and age of communications as they are, is that really necessary?  
Matt: Conference calls and things like that are used.
Sheila: Yea.
Tim: Wow…I think there’s an absolutely qualitative difference between a group of people sitting around a table and a group of screens with people with faces and talking.  I mean, there are all sorts of subtle means of communication between persons which just doesn’t happen between screens!  
Thomas: Yea, that’s very true…very, very true.
Tim: You know, I don’t think ever people getting together to do conferences can drop much below the level it is now.  
Karen: In the book shop I work in, there’s a whole section called ‘sustainable living’.  It’s actually in the politics section…which makes you feel like it kind of deters people from going there.    But, there was a lady who came in and she said ‘I haven’t decided where I am going to go on holiday yet but I definitely don’t want to fly!’  And, I was thinking…’well, are you going somewhere in Europe?’ and she said ‘no!’  And we literally looked through every book and…
Thomas: Holland?
Karen: And like every book had a section like ‘Eco-Travel’.  And, it was sort of just like a little pat on the back.  It didn’t…there was some that was really useful like ‘airlines that have been proven to use slightly less fuel’ or they’ll charge super low just to fill up the plane so that people who are going to pick a last minute holiday, at least the plane’s full so its using less fuel.  People who get charged more for weighing more, which seems wrong…but it means if the plane’s heavier they are getting charged more for the fuel…and stuff like this.  And, it didn’t seem to actually…each one had a big chapter, every single book covered Eco-Travel but none of them really had anything to say that you couldn’t think of yourself.  And, it makes you think that there’s really no way around it.  I had to say in the end ‘you can buy one of these books if you want…you can buy any of them.’  There’s a whole one ‘Eco-Travel’ but its more things like ‘hostels that don’t use electricity, you know…there was things like that.    There was very little way around flying…and there were things like ‘fly slightly closer…here’s an airport that’s slightly closer’ and then you can take an Eco-Taxi or a boat…quite clever like that.  Like mapping out ways where you could maybe cut your air travel in half or ¾’s.  But then you’re thinking:  ‘people just aren’t going to do this’.  If it’s going to cost you like an extra £100 to go the 100 miles closer rather than take a boat, people are just going to go ‘phfff’ aren’t they.
Dawn: I like getting from A to B as fast as possible…I don’t like travelling.
Karen: They were constructive but they didn’t address any issues that you couldn’t think of with flying.
Thomas: Was it that constructive, though?
Karen: Outside of flying, yea…but there’s no way around flying, really.  
Matt: That’s a thing in the newspaper today…’how to save your yearly petrol allowance:  1] Don’t drive when you don’t need to.’  [Laughter]    [Clap]  That’s great!  That’s a superb idea!   2] Car sharing.  It’s like for God sake, I’ve wasted money…am I actually going to read this!  
Karen: And the thing is, I kept thinking the whole time like ‘how much paper did this use, printing all these books that are useless?!’  It’s like surely it would be better if you just threw these in a furnace and ran a few more generators from it!
Matt: Plane companies need to be held responsible, you know, they are the biggest users…they need to be held responsible.  They need to be planting trees!  Planting trees, a brilliant way to offset a carbon footprint…easy…they make a lot of money, you know.
Moderator: You mention carbon footprints…are you aware of carbon offsetting schemes for flying…do you know these?
Sheila: Yea, I heard, I think it was Sienna Miller, bless her, on the radio talking about…to somebody she was being interviewed by…about ‘I’m going to try to offset my carbon footprint’ and planting so many trees and things, you know.  It sounded like solving your conscious, really.  And, she didn’t convince me she was doing it!    
Moderator: Simon, you said you know it…do you use it?
Simon: Yea, well…maybe…I’ve taken a plane like 3 or 4 times in the last couple of years and the recent couple of times I’ve seen an option, as you are booking your flight, ‘would you like to offset your flight’ and I thought how much can it be…and it was like £2 or something…a really small amount.    But, I can’t believe that £2 would…
Matt: What do they do with it?
Simon: They’ve got a big fund and then they give it to a tree planting charity.
Karen: Yea, or renewable energy…it’s running ads for renewable energy, I think.  
Matt: I’m sorry but £2 is not going to…it won’t buy you 1 tree.  
Tim: You can get a little tree.
Matt: Yea, alright…you’re right, it would buy you one tree but that is not going to offset…I mean, how far was the trip?
Simon: Well, to Poland.  
Matt: Well then, it’s not a short trip.  Maybe from here to Cornwall, you know, something like that…a couple of trees.  But, a flight like that, its rubbish.  It’s them trying to do their bit and show they are doing their bit…but £2!
Tim: I’m not sure…have we got the statistics on cost per mile?  I mean for flights.  I thought that most of the fuel for the flight was for taking off and coming down.  And, the cost per mile of the intermediate bit is a whole heap less.  So, the longer distances per mile are less costly to run than was mentioned. 
Simon: So, it’s the sort of inter-country…like when you’re sort of flying to Newquay from Exeter is kind of ridiculous!  You could put the same amount of fuel…a little extra maybe…and you can get anywhere in Europe.
Moderator: Okay, thanks a lot.  I only have one more issue in my schedule.  I want to ask…I want you to think about your behaviour at home…at your house.  What do you do to behave, let’s say, environmentally friendly?   Okay, Sandra?
Sandra: Sorry…I sneezed over what you said.
Moderator: Do you behave environmentally friendly at home…or what can you do?
Sandra: Yes…because I’m never there!  [Laughter]
Moderator: So that’s the perfect way to save the environment!
Sandra: My utility bills are very low.
Moderator: So there is one option…just don’t use anything. 
Sandra: I’m quite conservative with lights, I don’t use many electrical appliances, really…I just try to use as little as possible...and water, as well.  And even been on a meter and not on a meter…I won’t run a tap unless I need to.  I just sort of think about it, really.   
Moderator: Anything else, Sheila?
Sheila: I’ll go along with that.  I mean, I tend to switch the lights off…teenagers in the house are constantly leaving the lights on.  
Thomas: I’m very conscious about that.
Sheila: The tumble dryer, I try to make sure that’s not on too much…and composting, we do composting of late.  
Matt: I’ve taken the fuse out of my tumble dryer…just make sure [75:48].
Sheila: That’s what we’re going to do.  We’re going to take it out.
Tim: Composting probably liberates a lot of methane, which is 25 times worse than carbon dioxide in its heat retention properties.  Composting isn’t necessarily as green friendly as you might think.  
Karen: Yea, but if you’re going to land fill, surely it composts when it’s in the landfill anyway…but at least you can use it if it’s in your garden.  It’s going to be producing the methane in the landfill but if you’re composting…
Matt: Get a pig…they [76:19]  [Laughter]
Moderator: What about recycling?
Dawn: I’m very conscious of recycling.
Sheila: But, why haven’t we got glass bottle recycling from home?   It’s such a pain!  In Germany they have different boxes for different things.  You put them all out and it just goes, you know.  So, why not glass?
Thomas: I’ll admit to being really bad about recycling.  I can’t be bothered to wash it…chuck it in the bin.
Karen: Though washing it makes a difference, they don’t actually mind that much.  We went to the recycling plant for like a visit through and like people throw away like such awful stuff…like litter, medical waste, nappies…we saw like so much!  People just chuck it in the bin and they just like ‘throw it out’…they don’t care’.  And these people that aren’t recycling…I swear, we saw like 3 washed out things.   
Jenny: I throw mine in the recycling bin.
Karen: No, you shouldn’t do it but like they don’t care that much if you don’t really rinse it out, as long as you’re doing it.  The stuff does get like washed anyway…they just don’t want like big chunks of rotten food…and they’ll just leave your recycling bin.  But, if it’s just like a yogurt pot and you can’t be asked to rinse it out or a baked bean tin and you can’t be bothered…it all gets melted down and the germs are going to go.
Simon: It’s the smell because people like have to handle the stuff and they have to sort stuff on a conveyor belt.  
Karen: It’s just stuff that’s gonna hurt people…rotten food and stuff is bad but a little bit of smear is not that bad.  Its better that you just recycle it.
Sheila: I always wash everything because I was told that it contaminates it if you put anything in there that’s dirty.
Karen: You should wash it and its really helpful if you wash it but if you are not going to recycle because you have to wash it, I’d say recycle it anyway and they’ll still take most of your stuff through.    If there is stuff they don’t like, they will be like ok…they’ll just set that out.  No, no…it’s just like you’ll get a note.   
Simon: I’d say a rinse rather than a full wash.
Matt: I was flabbergasted the first time I saw cat food tins on the drainer.
Sheila: They smell, yea.
Matt: We pay enough taxes for other people to sort it, you know.  
Sandra: I have a special area where I put all the recycling stuff that’s been washed…I don’t keep it with my dishes!  
Karen: We’ve got like a 2 stage thing in our house and like our house is pretty small and there are 5 of us in there.  We’ve got like a tub at the side of the sink and that way if people want to put their dirty stuff in there and then we’ll rinse it when we get a chance.    And then, we’ve got like a recycling bin in the house and that gets transferred to the one outside of the house.  Because, when it was outside of the house, people couldn’t be bothered to go outside in the rain and stuff like that.  But, the only thing that we’ve found that is a real problem is the once every other week.  I always forget which week is the recycling.  And once it’s…you know, if you’ve got it in your kitchen…we put it on our kitchen counter…so once…there’s 6 of us…so once its full, you can’t start piling it on the top…people just start chucking it in the bin.    So, I think if they did it once every week…I know it might be a bit harder on the recycling plant, it might use more energy so it’s not actually helping…but that would be so amazing.   Because, if you forget for one week, then it’s like oh, you’ve got to wait like another whole week…or 2 weeks…until its recycling day.    
Sandra: Really, your rubbish should be recycled more than anything else.  
Thomas: The interesting point is I think that a lot of most peoples rubbish is glass, like you were mentioning…and that’s something they won’t take away.  But, I genuinely try to recycle [Overlapping comments] Yea, but you say that….
Karen: It’s not as if you don’t have a car.  If you don’t have a car its…we can’t do it.  See, ours is quite a way away.  I think the nearest way is…is it Old [79:59] Road, something like that? 
Matt: Being a student you’d have a lot of bottles!  [Laughter and comments]
Jenny: Just take a few with you when you…I don’t know…there’s ways around there.  I don’t think there is any excuse.
Karen: Or you just wait for someone to give you a lift.  That’s what we always do and then it’s like the big, once a month event.
Thomas: I just put it in my next doors garden.
Jenny: In other areas they do do it because in [80:29] they do take your glass.  
Simon: I think it’s the handling of broken glass…I think they are quite strict on it.  Obviously, they’ve got all these policies…the workers can’t be touching too much broken glass.  They’ve got gloves on, I mean, but how much protection is it.  I think if there was glass recycling and handling these bins of broken glass maybe…if they are left outside houses at night and maybe kids throwing glass around the street.
Karen: It was a really awful job.  When we went there, there were like 3 women and I think they were Polish but I’m not sure…and 1 old guy.  And, it stank…it was horrible being there.  It would make you want to wash your stuff out just to help these guys out.  And, they were just really happy and they were sorting it through.  And then we were like ‘what’s this big red handle?’   It’s like ‘oh, if there is any medical waste, like bloody bandages and syringes, we have to pull this’.  And, they were doing it, probably didn’t get paid that much and they were happy to do it.    It just makes you think like yea, if there was broken glass in there, that would just make…and it would break.  It goes on this massive conveyer belt…and it would just make their job so much harder.  And, it did make me feel really bad about being too lazy to take it.  So, I knew that I put it in the recycle bin and then it ends up on the top like ‘oh, yea, I forgot…they didn’t take it.’    
Simon: The thing that keeps me recycling is if I’m going to put something in the black bin, I just think this is going to go to land fill, it’s just going to sit somewhere and if it’s plastic, it never disappears.
Karen: Yea, you get the image…its like the image they always show on TV with the tractor ploughing and the sea gulls and there’s a sea gull caught in one of those can things…I think everyone’s got the same picture…and every time I’m about to go…[Laughter and comments]
Simon: If it’s anything its not sustainable, its landfill.  Because, if you look in like a thousand years time, England could be a landfill easily.  Like, we generate that amount of rubbish…its just crazy!
Sandra: What about plastic bags, then?
Karen: You can recycle plastic bags.  I think there is this myth that you can’t recycle them.  You maybe didn’t used to be able to but for the last couple of years at least, you can recycle them really easily.
Matt: The Co-op does 100% recycle bags as it is.
Karen: Yes, and degradable.
Matt: That’s what I mean…degradable.
Dawn: They degrade in 6 months or something.
Matt: Yes, and they really do!
Karen: You can use them for composting, too.  [Background comments and laughter]
Moderator: Thanks.  Tim, did you want to say something?
Tim: No, I was just thinking of a letter, in one of the papers, from the bloke who makes the mega-tons of plastic bags and he said ‘what’s wrong with plastic bags?  They get put into landfill sites and in hundreds of years they break into little particles and they are indistinguishable, they are inert, they are indistinguishable from earth and these biodegradable bags, they biodegrade and liberate methane’.  And, he’s right!     I mean, methane is a menace.  As I say, 25 times worse than carbon dioxide.  I mean there’s pros and cons…it’s not an open and shut case.  Plastic bags are bad and biodegradable is good.  Look at relevant arguments here.
Moderator: It’s complicated.
Tim: It is.
Sandra: So all we need is to get rid of the nuclear waste, though.
Moderator: That’s a different…that’s definitely a different focus!  Just one additional question…do you think these things we mentioned regarding your behaviour at the house, is it necessary to do these things at home:  recycling, saving energy…are those good things?
Jenny: Definitely.
Karen: Well just from a cost point of view…we had…our new house mate moved in…and he’s moved out now…but he had a huge computer and 2 big screens and he liked to just sit in his room.  And when you’d open the door to his room, it would be hot from like the computer.  It was…and he had game consoles and stuff…and a big stereo.  And, our electric bill for that quarter was a hundred pounds more then than the quarter previously.  And it really hits home just from having one extra machine or 2 or 3 extra machines on.
Thomas: I don’t think its something you learn, though, I think its something that’s kind of within you.  I think it’s you always kind of cautious of, you know…turn the lights off, turn the TV off.  I’ve always been like that.
Matt: Well, it used to be more out of money.
Thomas: My flatmate, he’d go out and leave the TV’s on, windows open, lights on, fires on and like ‘oh, don’t worry…it’s fine’.
Sandra: What about the energy saving bulbs…isn’t it cheaper to leave them on than turn them off?
Thomas: No, it’s like big strip lighting like this, it’s cheaper to leave them on but tiny, standard like 40 or 60 watt bulbs, it’s cheaper to turn them off and on.   
Sandra: [85:13] My boyfriend is always barking and he always says it’s cheaper to leave them on.  
Thomas: Yea, with big bulbs, like your kitchen old school kind…long, tube ones…it is but your standard ones, no.
Matt: That’s just an excuse when we forget!  [Laughter]
Moderator: Jenny?
Jenny: We’ve changed to low energy light bulbs…not everywhere…quite a few places now, I think…and you put extra insulation in the loft and things.  So, we have done things like that.  We live in an old house and its blooming cold…its horrible.  But I think in the end, people only start to do things and sit up taking notice…like looking at how they use cars and how much energy they use…when it’s…I was listening to the radio the other day and I think the gas prices have gone up like 40% or something.  And, it’s only when it hits people’s pockets that people start to think about it.     The environmental thing is like ooh, the wild blue yonder, you know…just doesn’t really register.  But, when it starts hitting them in their home insurance and pants, perhaps people will start changing their habits a bit more.  
Matt: Saying that, aren’t they…what do they call those bulbs you just said?
Jenny: Low energy.
Matt: Yea, they are very expensive, aren’t they?
Karen: Yea but they last for so long!  We’ve had one for 2 years in our hall way…and our hall way is on generally every night sort of all night because people are always coming and going.  It cost us like £8 because it was like super low energy.  It’s quite bright and its 2 years that it’s lasted.  Like, we haven’t had to change it.  That’s like such a long time!
Jenny: I think some are subsidised.  My husband got some through his work.  
Thomas: That’s what I was just going to say…they should be.  The government sought to subsidise them, shouldn’t they?
Jenny: Yea, I think we got them at a subsidised price.
Dawn: I find that when my children were home, it would be like [86:58].  The whole place would be lit, there would be radios going…but now that they’ve got their own places…[Laughter]
Tim: Yea, but you talk about lights being on…I mean, if people really want to see where energy is going, they should just get on to Google and go to ‘Earth at Night’ and you have a picture of the earth, the whole of the earth taken from satellites at night…and its ablaze!   Now, that’s an enormous waste of energy and therefore, carbon dioxide production…and quite now we are on to so much carbon dioxide production with…connected with transport, but nonetheless we’re there…and this must be a major source of global warming!
Sheila: There was a program about Shanghai on the other night and to light Shanghai it takes the power from 17 power stations. 
Karen: That’s a bit like Las Vegas, isn’t it!
Matt: But then, you wouldn’t want your daughter walking home in the dark, would you?
Tim: Well, there’s that…no, no, no…that’s not the point.  The point is that lights should all be downward directed.  That’s a fact, that the light is wasted.  40% of the light just goes out into space.  The lighting bill overnight could be almost halved…well, almost a third…and the energy and the waste of CO2 would be cut by a third if lights were properly constructed.  But you are absolutely right…I’m not arguing that your daughter shouldn’t be safe going home…they should be properly constructed.
Moderator: Thanks very much.  That was really an interesting discussion, I have to say.  We’re running slightly out of time.  I want to ask you one more thing before I come around and give you your money…your well earned money…to fill out these forms with just 4 more questions.  Like the other things, it’s completely anonymous.  That would be really helpful.    And like I said, I hope you enjoyed it a little bit! And thanks again for being her and yea, thank you much! 