Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Welcome everybody, it’s really nice to have you here and my name is Moderator, I’m a Researcher at Exeter University in the Department of Geography and we are doing a two years project related to travel behaviour.  So to say, how people move from one place to another.  What means of transport they use and about their opinions.  We ask them about their opinion regarding to certain measures, to some issues regarding to transport and these group meetings are the first stage of the project so again welcome to you.    We will have approximately 90 minute discussion, sometimes we finish earlier sometimes a little bit longer - it depends on how the discussion is going on.  So far I had really interesting discussion groups and there is no doubt this will be one of them.    The first thing I have to mention is because we are taping I would ask you to let one person at a time speak, so if somebody speaks just let him or her say whatever he or she wants and then if you want to add something step up afterwards and I’ll try to steer it a little bit but you are free to speak whenever you think you can as long as its not two persons at the same time.  As I said I want to start with a small introduction.  As I said, my name is Moderator and maybe we can start to my left with you.  You only have to mention your first name, that’s okay for me.  Tell as much as you want.
James: James.  I’m a retired Nursery Nurse.  I have a partner with two children. 
Tanya: Hi, I’m Tanya.  I’m a hairstylist.
Joe: I’m Joe. I work for the police.
Lottie: Hi, I’m Lottie.  I also work for the police and (0:02:28) I’ve got a husband and two children.
Josie: I’m Josie. I’m working in a hospital outside Exeter although I live in Exeter.
Jill: I’m Jill, I work in Exeter and live in Exeter too.
Pula: I’m Pula and I work at Exeter Hospital.
Moderator: OK, thank you very much.  First thing I want to ask you, it’s a little bit similar to the thing you were asked during recruiting at your house.  To fill out these forms, don’t think too much about it, just something to start with and if you could pass them around, just about your different travel purposes do you prefer mode of transport.  And if you can think of an alternative, if you don’t have an alternative then just leave it out and don’t think too much about it we will just shortly start to speak about it.
Lottie: Do you have to write in what you prefer for transport for each one?  
Moderator: Yes.  Just as I said don’t make it too complicated, just to have something to speak about later.  OK.  Thanks a lot.  So as I said, the first question was pretty much related to that topic.  In general, when I ask you all which modes of transport you usually use, and I want you to think about different purposes for travel and especially if there are major differences in the way you travel for different purposes.  Maybe let’s ask Pula first.
Pula: My preferred mode for all of them is car, I think.  A lot of the time I would prefer to use another but it’s not always realistic and also I’m a bit of a fair weather cyclist so if it’s sunny I’ll cycle to work but if it’s rainy then I’ll drive.
Moderator: So you said you would prefer to use other things.
Pula: Yes I think I’m very aware of the fact that it’s frowned upon to use your car when perhaps you could use another method, but I suppose if say for example, I’m going for a big food shop it’s not really practical to get to cycle if I need to carry all the stuff back.  And if you’re a bit late for work then it’s much easier to just hop in the car as opposed to jogging.
Moderator: Thanks.  Anyone else?  Lottie?
Lottie: Well, the majority I suppose I use the car for convenience as much as anything.  I do walk to work; I don’t have to use a car because work is quite close to where I live so it’s not a problem.
Becky: Sorry am I late?
Moderator: OK.  Come in, take a seat, take something to drink.  Can I ask you what your name is?
Becky: Becky.  
Moderator: And you are?
Rosie: Rosie.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.  We’re just starting to talk about different modes of transport you use for different travel purposes and if you can just join the discussion.  Take a seat and take your time and maybe take something to drink if you want.  We’ll just carry on.  Sorry, Lottie again?
Lottie: Yes.  I just said I walk to work.  I tend to use the car probably more than maybe the bus or the train which I do quite enjoy using but it’s usually down to cost because I’m taking the children as well and it works out more cost effective to take the car then it does to pay out for all of us to go on the bus or the train.  But if that was much cheaper alternative then I would quite happy to use public transport.
Moderator: OK.  James?
James: Bus and bike mostly.  Car for longer distances like going on holiday or trips out to the countryside and walking.  I do a lot of walking.
Moderator: Why?
James: Why?  Because my partner has two dogs which need a lot of exercise.
Moderator: Joe?
Joe: I normally use the car – quite a lot.  I do walk to work now as it’s just round the corner other than that I pretty much use the car for most things.
Moderator: Are you working?
Joe: Where am I working?
 Moderator: Are you working full time?
Joe: Yes, full time.
Moderator: Do you have to travel for work maybe?
Joe: No.  Not in my current work.
Moderator: OK.  Anybody else maybe?  Travelling for working.
Becky: Yes, we do.
Moderator: Yes, what do you do?  Becky?
Becky: We go on the bus.  Sometimes if I’m out with boyfriends I’ll walk home but not too much.
Rosie: Train or sometimes on the odd occasion, a bus.
Moderator: Maybe there is something you like about the way you travel?  For shopping? For work? Whatever?  Or to your work.  If there are things you don’t like about it?  Jean?
Jean: I mostly use my car and I like the fact that it’s very convenient and things can be done a lot faster.  But I do enjoy – Pula and I normally car share to work – so we kind of take it in turns but in terms of cycling as well there always seems to be a reason why I would need my car so if it’s just that you’ve got to get to the bank after work and then that’s the only way I can do that is to use my car or like Pula was saying before to go food shopping or to pick someone up I would definitely need to use my car but then cycling I quite enjoy doing cycling and I would quite like to do that more but it’s just fitting it in around the sort of after-work activities that I need to do.  And it’s quite scary, cycling in Exeter, sometimes.  The first time we went, we got beeped at, so I would quite like to do more cycling.  The thing that really frustrates me about public transports and I think it’s slightly different from Plymouth.  I think its different in Plymouth then it is in Exeter, is that it really isn’t very convenient and now living at Kings Heath compared to living near town it just takes so much longer and you’re looking at two buses to get back from St David’s rather than one.  And if you’ve got a lot to do it’s just easier to get a taxi even though you have to pay more on those kind of days.
James: Plus the fact that on Saturdays and Sundays, Sundays in particular, there aren’t any buses (0:11:59) at the moment.
Jean: And it’s the same with the trains.  Like if you get a late train back from Plymouth.  My ex-boyfriend used to watch Plymouth play and the last train is 10 and the next train is like 2 in the morning.  So actually to get a train back at night from Plymouth is just impossible, you can’t do it.  And likewise the trains from St David’s to Digby are rubbish on a Sunday and after 7 o’clock.  I think we would use the train to go into town a bit but then we’d never get a train back.
Moderator: Ok, Josie, something to add?
Josie: Well I suppose my issue with travel is that I work down in Torquay so the option for me is my car.  There isn’t really any other options, because with the train it would mean that I would be at work at 7 o’clock in the morning because there is no other train to get me in for 8.30 for work so that’s probably not the most convenient way of me getting down to Torquay.  So, due to that fact, I end up using my car.  The only thing with it is the roads that I go along are the most congested roads probably around where it goes down to single road and it does mean that if there’s any traffic problems I will get caught in it, or if there’s an accident on that road, it potentially means it could take me over an hour or plus to get home.  Just because of diversions and the road network that we’ve got, so it’s not the best option to use my car especially the journey I have to do but it is quite a long journey and it is the most convenient way of doing it.  Fortunately for me, I’m starting a new job in a month and so then the options for me will open as I can ride my bike, I can walk, I can catch a park and ride or I could drive my car.  All options all of a sudden open out and I think really it depends on how close you are to where you work and what those roads or pathways are like to get to your work.  Whereas I think nowadays people don’t have the option to live near their work or it’s not an option people take, people decide where they want to live just for the area that the house is in, the prices, what they can rent, what they can afford.  Whereas I think it used to be that people definitely always worked nearer to where they lived, where they worked.
Moderator: Thanks!  Tanya?
Tanya: I rely on my car because at the moment I’m working in (0:14:37) so the easiest way is to drive otherwise I’d have to get a train to Exmouth and then wait and get a bus to Budleigh.  So that’s why walking, bus, train - 
Moderator: That’s really inconvenient.
Tanya: Yes.  Definitely, and I’ve always got things on after work as well so I always really need my car all the time.
Moderator: Josie, you mentioned something.  The thing that people choose the places to live by financial aspects – what they can afford
Josie: Yes.  Where they want to live really.  Because I know that when I moved up here, in March time, to rent somewhere, it was all done more on what sort of house I wanted to live in, (0:15:20) and area that it was, what I needed from a rented property and that really wasn’t done on where I was going to work or convenience and I think that was the same for all the people I was going to live with.  Although we wanted it as close to potentially all our work as possible, to make it as easy as possible, ultimately it came down to what was the price of where we were going to rent and did the property give us what we actually needed.  So we looked at that probably more than actually 100% where the location was.
Moderator: Thanks!  Joe, what do you think?  Did the way you travel maybe influence your choice of housing location or is it the opposite way around?
Joe: I’m not sure really.  I’m just trying to think where I live now is probably because I have a car and that it meant that I can just, we sort of picked where we live now, just picked it for the house more than the location.  It was convenient, that it’s right next door to work so that does help.
Tanya: But not convenient for me!
Joe: We didn’t really want to live in Budleigh!  But what’s put me off using buses I think quite a lot is I just think it’s really bad in Exeter the bus timetable.  And I’ve always had a bad experience whenever I’ve been waiting for a bus, I’ve been waiting for ages and it never comes on time, and they’re not really good in Exeter really, so that’s put me off using buses.
Pula: I think people just have such a high pace of lifestyle.  They see travel as wasted time.  So just the quickest you can get from place to place people just see that as best and if it takes longer people just see that as a waste of free time or you know people want to get back from work or think travel just seems a waste of time really.
Becky: I have got a bike as well, but I don’t tend to use it for a purpose.  If I use my bike it’s because I’m going on a bike ride for the sake of going on a bike ride rather than, so then I’ll go to a nice place rather than use it to get to work.  I don’t think it’s that enjoyable cycling on the roads.
James: But sometimes, it’s inconvenient with bikes and public transport, its okay if we’re down in Digby because you can put the bike on and then you go down to Exeter but if you want to go somewhere else like Holden or somewhere like that, you’re always frowned upon by trying to get this bicycle onto a bus.  They don’t seem to take that into consideration, the fact that people do want to do a bit more biking and public transport.  I mean it’s actually, Digby as we all know that live in that area, buses are tiny apart from the H1 and H2 but you come across this big barrier every time you try to save the environment by being a cyclist or even a walker.  
Jean: I’ve just come back from Madrid and they had, in the centre of Madrid, they had places to leave your bike everywhere.  They had, I don’t know what they’re called.
Moderator: Bike racks?
Jean: Yes!  Absolutely everywhere and I was thinking I wouldn’t even know where I could leave my bike in Exeter city centre and in Lyon in France they have bikes that you put in £1 or £2 from say the train station and then you can park it and you can leave it in loads of places around the centre, so you don’t even need to own your own bike.  You just get on the bike and then you’d drop it off at the nearest bike stop.  So you don’t need to take it back from where you started from, you can leave it off close to your destination.
James: There was a piece on television, I think it was last night about Bristol where they’re going to have the same sort of scheme but I think there was 15 bikes in comparison to.  Was it somewhere else, where there was x amount of bikes that you could 
Jean: Everybody cycling around on them and it’s so cheap that you’d be silly not to use it.  Maybe.
Joe: But it’s open to abuse because people could just (0:19:54)
James: I think the machine itself that you put the money in does actually have something to do with it, because if you’re paying by card for instance, they can trace back who you are, by the details by the card, so there is a bit of a …. I’m not quite sure about the cash side of it.  When I saw it on the television, I thought what an amazing scheme and then when it comes to Bristol – 15 bicycles – wow!
Moderator: Thanks for that!
Becky: I think in Debenhams like more people ride now though because they have the bike bit (0:20:33) because Steve and Pula and that ride to work now because it’s just outside the back 
Rosie: And they have plenty of bicycle racks where we are.  Right out the back, by the wall, don’t they?
Becky: And I think more people lock their bikes up now don’t they?
Rosie: Because a lot of people do take bikes.
Becky: Yes they do don’t they?
Moderator: Thanks a lot, yeah!  What do you think about lets say using public transport?
Pula: In the mornings, you just stand there and sometimes I can leave at half past eight and I’ll get there at 20 to 9 and sometimes I can leave at the same time and not get there until 10 past 9.  It’s the same every morning, its just luck really.  I can get there at the same time everyday and it’s just different.  And coming home is worst than going.
Moderator: I just want you to think about something.  Did your travel mode or your travel behaviour in general maybe change during the last couple of months, or maybe years?  Rosie?
Rosie: Yes, mine has.  I changed from the bus to the train because the bus was really inconvenient because I live in the Digby area and the buses were like every half an hour but on the odd occasion in the morning when I had to go to work it wouldn’t turn up and also the train takes about ten minutes and is cheaper if you go past 9, it’s a lot cheaper now because it is like £2 for a return and with the bus it’s like £2.60, something like that.  And it’s just a lot cheaper and it’s quicker and it’s more convenient like, you know, it’s always on time normally.  On the odd occasion, rarely, it will be late, so it’s good.
Jean: I think as a student, I walked a lot more.  A lot because you’re not quite so rushed and you’ve got more time to get to places and it’s not like work in that you can turn up a little bit late to lectures and things.  Also, you can just not afford petrol, so I couldn’t afford to have my car here and so I think you just get on with it, you know that you can’t afford to get the bus or drive so you just walk, no matter what the weather, whereas now I’ve got my car here so I use it.  Just because you have it there, so I think since working I’ve used my car a lot more than when I was a student.
Pula: My mode changed because I passed my driving test.  So I went from a pedestrian to a driver quite quickly.
Lottie: I’m sure a lot of people would use more public transport if it was (a) cheaper and (b) more reliable especially the cost of petrol and keeping a car on the road, it’s not cheap but like most people here it is more convenient to have a car and just jump in a car and whiz off to where you are going.  Because you don’t always know if the bus is going to turn up and you can just spend ages just sitting around waiting.
Becky: The buses are really expensive.
Rosie: Yes.  They go up all the time.  Like because I used to go on the bus for a £1 and now it’s like £1.60 literally like every time you go. 
Tanya: When I used to get the train from Exmouth to Exeter.  If you got on the train before 9 o’clock it was so much more expensive than if you went at half past 9.  Because it’s like peak time.
Jean: Which is strange you see, because you would have thought that most people would be there travelling to work because that’s the biggest time that people do travel – travelling to work – so if they want people to actually use public services and use the buses, use the trains, use other modes, then you need to encourage them by actually making it cheaper to get to work in the work time.  Which is actually before half past 9, as the cheapest time.  And I think, which is going to sound awful now, one of the things with me probably I know its quite publicised about the reason the public, you know the buses are more expensive is that great you give free bus passes to people over a certain age, which is fantastic for those people because then they can travel.  Especially just to go into town for people who are over 60, which is great for them, but they’ve also given it so that they can go a lot further, but the knock on effect of that is that because people are using it for free, and they’ve been overwhelmed by the people who are using this free with their bus passes, someone has got to pay for that service, so they have to put up the prices.  So then, all the people who are going to work, therefore, that’s why they put up the prices.  So it is a bit of a knock on effect which is great that they’ve got free passes, I think that’s great for some people to get around, but the knock on effect then for people who are working is that they whack up the prices for those people and they do it even more, but they do it in the peak times when they want people off the roads during peak hours, not using their cars, but then make it more expensive at that time to use the public buses.
James: Can I jump in here again, sorry?  I’d just turned 60 in February and I got my bus pass.  I do use it an awful lot as much as I can but I can only use it after 9.30 for a start so it doesn’t really affect people who go to work before 9.30 and on top of that the Government in their great wisdom said yes, we’ve got to pump in x amount of pounds into different areas to actually make sure that this knock on effect doesn’t happen, but then they vastly miscalculated precisely how many people would be using the buses after that time.  On Saturday and Sunday you can use it at any time but it’s been another Government mistake by total miscalculation.  So, therefore, the likes of myself are getting it in the neck from people who are, that perceive that they are paying more money, because of that and another thing, in the defence of the bus passes is the fact that if the, during the daytime, after that 9.30 block, if the people that weren’t using the bus passes, the buses would be empty.  It’s amazing, I came into town the other day and there were only two people on the bus that was nearly full that paid, and this is from Digby into town itself, and there were only 2 people that paid but each one of those tickets, the bus companies, do get the money.  But they get the money from the Government and the Government just suddenly thought what have we done?  We have given the wrong amount of money because we should be giving more to each individual bus company.  Like somebody, I think 2 or 3 people if not more have actually travelled from John O’Groats to Lands End and back again by using their passes.  OK, they’re all retired, they’re like myself, they’ve got a fair amount of time on their hands so therefore they can actually do that, but to be able to do that is really good for somebody of my age and somebody who is a lot older than me, and I’m sorry if you perceive it to have a knock on effect.
Jean: I think it’s good that people can go out and people, who potentially wouldn’t have gone out, can go out, but I think the problem with that is that somehow to me the Government have got to pay for that scheme.
James: Oh yes.  But they said they would in the first place, but as I said they haven’t got a clue.  They had not got a clue that Mrs Jones who is 70-odd might want to go on the bus after 9.30 to go to the bingo or to go and see Mrs Smith down the road – whatever.  They just didn’t understand what a can of worms they were actually opening so, sorry but it was the Government and not us.
Pula: I think that talking about buses though recently I got one of the Mega Buses to London and it cost £4 and it was brilliant.  I think it was 9 o’clock from Exeter Bus Station and it got to London Victoria by 1 – 1.30 direct route.
James: You had to book on line though?
Pula: Yes.
James: To be honest with you, I’d love to do that but I don’t have access to a computer.  I know the majority of people of your ages do have access to the internet.
Pula: But we don’t have at home, we have at work but when I didn’t use it at work there’s internet cafes and things.  For £4 I’d quite happily go and seek it out and I think that’s almost the problem with public transport it needs to be a competitive market.  If you’ve got two people trying to sell the same thing and it will drive the prices down and having the Mega Bus being a bit separate from National Express has meant that they have had to re-evaluate their pricing system which for the paying customer is brilliant because for me, I don’t want to drive my car to London, I wouldn’t have a clue where to park it.  It costs so much for petrol, to just be able to get on a bus and get out in central London four hours later is brilliant.  For £4 and I think to get back it was £9 – it was a bit more to get back – and that was on a Saturday morning.  It was an important time to travel it wasn’t as if I was travelling in the middle of the day and I would definitely do that again.
Lottie: I was thinking about doing that but I thought it was a lot longer.
Pula: It was a direct, it was quicker than the National Express because we didn’t have to stop and I think with the trains I always think that the trains are always so much more convenient because it is a lot quicker and you get there quicker.  But for me, at the time, I was living in Mount Pleasant and actually just to walk down to the bus station, whereas St David’s is further and then I didn’t have to swap and it took me right to the centre, and I don’t even think we booked it that far in advance.  I think it was just a couple of weeks.
Jean: I think also, going back to Government schemes, I think that Government schemes are always very short term because from a cynical point of view, they are just looking for votes so they’re not going to thoroughly research it, they’re not going to really think it through, it’s just going to be what age group haven’t we got many votes from this year or what do we need to improve in the short term so they’re not always going to think this through, are they?
James: I thought when I got my bus pass that it would be an indefinite time limit, but it’s not, there’s a certain …. I’m supposed to die in 2014 after that I can’t use my bus pass.  Hearse not a bus!
Moderator: One last question on that issue I want to ask you, if anybody thinks about it.  Do you sometimes wish you could use other modes of transport?  And why you maybe can’t use them.  Anybody?
Jean: I think the weather has a lot to do with it in this country.  I know personally that if it was sunny every day I’d definitely be more keen to cycle or walk but if I get up in the morning and look out and it’s raining there’s just no way I’m going to cycle.  So I think definitely in this country the weather has a lot to do with it.
Pula: Because I obviously think then that if we arrived at work absolutely soaking wet, we would then have to get there half an hour early so that we could sort ourselves out and dry ourselves off.  Take a spare set of clothes with us and I think it’s more like you said earlier is that it’s not that you can’t use other modes of transport it’s just that our lifestyles mean that we’re all so busy that convenience actually always wins.
Moderator: Thank you!  Slight change of topic.  I want to know something about your holiday travel now.  What your preferred destinations may be and how often do you go there and especially how?  Maybe let’s start with Tanya?
Tanya: Well, I like to go on holiday at least once a year.  I like to go somewhere hot so I always fly.  Flying is the best way if you want to go somewhere nice.
Moderator: Do you enjoy it?
Tanya: Yes.  When I can afford to go.
Joe: The same here, probably.  I like to go abroad so I pretty much always have to fly.  Unless you go to Cornwall and then we drive.
Moderator: Yes.  It’s easier than flying to Cornwall.
Joe: But I think people have started to fly a lot more, like especially from Exeter a lot more sort of inside the UK.  There’s a lot more flights going from Exeter now.  Like my Mum, we sometimes fly to Manchester to see my Granddad whereas we would have driven before, but now there’s a flight available it’s a lot quicker.  It actually works out cheaper, so we fly.  
Moderator: So that recently changed for you, so to say?  During the last years.
Joe: Has it changed?  Yes!  It’s changed because they now do a flight from Exeter direct to Manchester.  It does work out cheaper and quicker.
Josie: Yes.  I know a lot of people who do that now.  Fly.  A lot of people from down here if they’re going up to Scotland, most people now I know, would fly.  That would be the first method that they would go for because flights now do go internally really.
Jean: I’ve driven before and it took me ten.
Lottie: If you know you’re going to fly somewhere again you have to have the internet but you can book up in advance and can get really really cheap flights.  Even you’re talking about a few pounds, I know you’ve got taxes but it’s just so cheap compared to what it would cost you in the car.
Josie: Normally, like this summer I’m going to France I’m going on a road trip we’re just doing it because we found it to be cheaper just to split this as passengers in the car and just to split the cost so we’re going through the Euro Tunnel and it’s like going to cost us £40 just to go across, and you can stop off, we’re stopping off in Paris and all that.  We find it cheaper to do that and just split the cost of petrol and everything and you know.  So we’re going to do that, that’s the best way for us I think, or for me.
Pula: When I was a student, me and my boyfriend went on a bus and it took 2 days to get to Paris and it was really cheap but it was brilliant, but now annual leave is so precious we don’t get many weeks off a year and I just would feel awful that it would take 2 days to get somewhere because at the end of the day it would take an hour and a half on the plane, again it’s coming back to time being precious.
Josie: Did you go across on the ferry?
Pula: We went on the bus which went on the Euro Star.
James: Can I just ask a question about when you go to these places Manchester or up to Scotland, how about the knock on effect about actually going to Manchester Airport into Manchester itself?  Do you find that inconvenient or convenient?
Joe: Normally, it’s quite convenient because you just hop in a taxi and there are taxis waiting right outside the airport and to get to my Granddad’s house it probably costs about £10 between me and my Mum.  It’s not that much really.  Sometimes, because we normally have quite a lot of bags on us, but sometimes we can get the Metro – that’s good in Manchester.
Lottie: We flew to Dublin a couple of years ago and there was a bus right outside Dublin Airport which takes you into the centre of Dublin, and we just hopped on the bus I think it was 3 Euros per chair.
James: It seems strange to me that with something along those lines where you go into Manchester or Dublin or even to Scotland, at the other end of it seems to be really well fixed up as regards to getting into city centres, but within the city centres themselves it seems to be really really inconvenient, I don’t understand why.
Joe: I think it is in certain cities, but other cities are really good like Manchester has got a brilliant Metro – they’ve just redone it all – and you can get anywhere practically and its really quick but I think it’s better in bigger cities but you’ve got cities like Exeter and its just completely random, you don’t know how to get anywhere.
Pula: When you say Metro, do you mean they’ve got an underground service there?
Joe: Yes.   Well its not underground, it’s like a metro link, it’s overland.  It’s like a tram, it goes on a railway but it also goes along the roads.
Jean: They still think that they compare to the rest of Europe, it is quite expensive here for transport.  Because when we went to Madrid again it was one Euro to go from the airport to the very centre and it was much further out than Exeter Airport.  It was probably about 25 minutes at least to get there and then we bought a Metro Pass for three days to go anywhere we wanted for 9 Euros for three days, it was brilliant and like comparatively 9 Euros really here wouldn’t get you really far, and it’s really convenient.
Joe: It’s just so easy that you can just hop on anywhere with the same ticket.
Jean: Never waited more than 5 minutes ever, no matter what time of day it was, and no matter where we were we never waited more than 5 minutes.
James: Did you not think that a lot of that is because we are a very capitalist country?  The fact that half of it is making money rather than for people’s convenience.
Jean: That doesn’t necessarily make it right.
James: No, I’m not defending it at all.
Jean: Like the TGB in France, you can go for miles and miles on the fast train, and I thought crikey that’s going to be loads of money to be able to go from Paris to Marseilles, half the length of the country, and it’s really cheap.  Not expensive.  Like a train ticket from Scotland to here would be – there wouldn’t be any point in getting the train, you would fly.
James: Well I was gob smacked the other day.  My friend, she’s a postie and she was up for an award with the Royal Mail and they sent us the tickets, it was £185 to get from here to London return, second class, and when the tickets came through eventually my mouth just dropped open I could not believe, how could they justify £185 when as you say, you can get to London for £4 or even on the other a lot cheaper and you can even fly into London a lot cheaper.
Jean: And I think when it comes to me picking my holiday, part of me does feel a bit guilty that the flights are really cheap because I know its not really very good for the environment but then I think we’ve again paid £65 return to Madrid but to fill up my boyfriend’s car to get us to Bristol Airport was £67.  Like why would we stay if it costs that much for us to go somewhere we’ve never been, why would we stay here?
Rosie: And also if the Government was so concerned about the environment, they would be promoting alternative fuels, and they would make public transport better.  No-one hears about bio-gas but that’s half the price of petrol.  The Government because petrol has so much tax on it and they make so much money on it they’re not interested in promoting it.
James: I think it’s laughable that I think its next year or the year after that they’ve got to be something like 10% of bio-fields in fuel.  10%?  It’s nothing, absolutely nothing.  10% you use by turning on the engine and starting the damn thing.
Jean: But also there’s a stigma attached, in my mind, that it’s quite inconvenient to fill up your car with gas.  But I met a guy on the weekend that used it in his car and there are loads of petrol stations you could go to and it was 56p a litre, and he’d driven down from Hereford and he said it was fine he would definitely find a petrol station while he was here and there was one just up the road, I didn’t even know did gas.
Moderator: I didn’t know that.
Jean: No, and it costs quite a lot to convert your car to it, but you make your money back so quickly because it’s so cheap.
Moderator: Especially in these days.
Jean: If you use your car a lot it’s definitely
Moderator: Thanks Jean!  I want to come back to that point later maybe but I just want to come back to something you mentioned.  You said in Madrid you used a lot more public transport, Metro whatever.  Does anybody else change their travel behaviour when he or she is on holiday?  Lottie?
Lottie: Definitely, when we’re on holiday we use public transport.  I find it quite interesting to go around and actually see parts of the countryside or the town, wherever you are, with a car and you’re driving you can’t really see the same.  A couple of years ago we went to Australia and particularly in Perth and they’ve got a completely free transport system for everybody and the buses just go round the town.  They run like every 5 or 10 minutes and the people are just constantly hopping on, hopping off.  Hardly any cars around at all, and I just think that if we as a country could somehow afford to be able to do that it would solve so many problems because people would use public transport, if you could just jump on and off.
Rosie: When I went to Turkey in April.  Literally, you just went to the road and you just put your hand and I can’t remember what the buses were called, something different there.  And it’s quite exciting, well it’s not its scary because everybody’s crammed into them and it was really scary because we were going up this mountain and literally the doors were open and you could see.  I was like – oh my god we’re going to die – and then like, it’s just little things like, in the evening, like here I don’t use taxis very often but the taxi there is like £1 to go miles, they use boats and stuff to get to places like we just wanted to get that way.  You can drive round but you can go on the boat across, can’t you?
Becky: They use boats.  In Spain I love using the boat because you get some of the boats you can take proper boat trips so you can see the ocean life, so you’re seeing things as well but it’s nicer isn’t it?
Josie: I think when you’re on holiday you want to try different things, don’t you?
Jean: And you’ve got no rush to get anywhere.  No time pressures have you?  That’s the beauty.
Josie: The sun is always shining as well.
Joe: I was just going to say that when I went to Madrid, we just hopped just for fun; we just spent the day randomly getting on the underground and seeing where we ended up.  We just spent a day doing that.
Jean: And it’s nice like there were violinists and people playing music
Joe: And it’s so much more relaxed on holiday as well.
Moderator: Thanks a lot!  I have to bring up another issue.  We sometimes use the term sustainable travel.  Does anybody know what that maybe means; can anybody explain what could be meant by that?
Jean: I suppose it’s worth it in the long term.  So maybe it could be from a Government point of view or an environmental point of view, I suppose.  Government in that they don’t lose money on it and environmental in that it’s not damaging the environment.
Tanya: I guess it’s a renewable energy source in some ways.  So it’s always sustainable because it’s going to run out.
Jean: Well I would imagine that sustainable travel is something that doesn’t use something that’s going to end, so aeroplane travel, cars, buses will all have a life limit because they use an energy that at some point potentially will run out because we won’t have the petrol therefore we have to find another way of having the energy that it needs but via a different source.  So you could say that a bike is sustainable – it doesn’t need any energy apart from the person themselves, so that’s okay.  As long as you’ve got energy for your bike.  So to make it sustainable it needs to be able to not have an end or have an energy source that will not at some point end.  Which is the problem with the travel because it needs petrol.
James: But coming back to the money making side of it.  They are putting an awful lot of time and effort into making things like electric cars or solar powered cars and what have you but there seems to be a lot of barriers from your fossil fuel people about doing that.  By damning it all the time, by having a different sort of press, saying this isn’t good, you know like the electrical bicycles for instance.  When they first came into being they had a really really good press and then because they weren’t making them properly and people were having an awful lot of problems with the electric side with it, the sales of electric sales just went whoosh like that and that is a fairly good sort of method.  Even solar powered cars and what have you, for some unknown reason the oil people don’t want these, well for the obvious reasons, not for some reason, for the obvious reason.  They don’t want these things to progress because it is going to take their money away.  It’s a shame, to my mind, solar power even now, on a horrible day like this, energy can be stored on a day like this, and it’s not being used.
Pula: The companies just wouldn’t be able to compete with the (0:0:48)
James: Money, money, money.
Jean: And what’s interesting about it is about the press, because that’s where a lot of it comes from.  That’s what we all feed on, we have things coming in, you know media, we’re getting information all the time about advertising, about information coming at you.  So it depends what information is being portrayed, and one day it will be one thing and then the next thing something else.  And one day it will be trains are a fantastic way to get around, and then the next day it’s all about how they’ve just hiked up the prices, and then they can just sell it in the terms of hiking up prices and the price of butter, the price of  or aeroplanes are going to go add on extra prices there, but then you can still go and find, they don’t say about the certain deals to do this or there’s other things (0:48:44) so it all depends how they sell it to you and how the media portrays so many different things.
Tanya: Also, but what goes for the media and the Government, so it’s usually what you’re told.
Jean: Yes you do.
Lottie: And also it’s a status thing having a nice car and having a private jet so it’s not just convenience if you’ve got the money; people like to spend it on travelling in style.
Tanya: And I also think like to stop, like my parents have got solar panels in their house, but to start with it was really expensive to get that, so they make it quite difficult for you to invest in something like that in the first place, but now it’s exactly the same as what we were saying before about the cars and the gas car.  Like now that they’ve got it they are actually saving money because they very rarely need to put their heating on to heat their water in the summer they hardly ever use it.  But the initial cost is enough to put a lot of people off.
Joe: Whereas they don’t think twice about putting £60 in their car at the end of the day.
Moderator: Thanks!  You mentioned very important things.  In general just to give you a short explanation the concept of sustainability refers to in general so to say keeping the world a little bit for the future generations, you know.  So it’s pretty much related to environmental issues but also financial and in general economic and other social aspects.  To let people live the lives they want to live.  But it’s all pretty much as I said, related to environmentally friendly modes of transport – sustainable travel.  Does anybody think, or can anyone say if he or she thinks he or she travels environmentally friendly or sustainable and maybe if not, why not?  
Jean: So do you mean like cycling?
Moderator: For instance, yes.  You said something with the weather.
Jean: Yes, again it’s just down to the weather.
Moderator: You can’t change it really, much, so let me add something.  What do you think would make it more attractive for people of for you in person to change to a more environmentally friendly or more sustainable mode of transport or behave more (0:51:15)
Jean: I think a lot is motorists’ attitudes towards cyclists.  I mean it’s scary on some of the roads.  But then also when I’m in a car I don’t really like driving around cyclists, I’m a bit of a hypocrite.
Pula: I think cycle lanes up near where we live near Kings Heath, it’s so nice.  The first part of our journey is lovely because it’s all cycle lanes and then halfway it’s not cycle lanes and it’s not very nice.
Jean: No that bit’s not so good.  So I think a better structure for cyclists in the centre really.
Joe: I don’t feel very confident about cycling on the roads.  If I do cycle anywhere then I will cycle on the pavement.
Jean: Yes, that’s what we do.
Joe: But if they have more cycle lanes and if I knew the route to go, that would be a convenient route, then I think I would use it.
Lottie: I don’t like driving past them when I’m in my car either.
Josie: When you learn to drive, you’re not taught how to deal with cyclists.  It sounds really simple that you just drive past them.
Pula: It’s not until you’re a cyclist
Josie: No, you don’t take notes of what it’s like and then when you’re a cyclist again you’re not, apart from when I was like 9 years old, taught that there is a way to cycle on the roads and there is certain things and there is things you can do to make it safer for yourself and easier for people to know what you are going to do, but people aren’t aware of that.  Like there are things that you can, people don’t make it easier for themselves either, they’re not seen, a cyclist making themselves easier visible but then again I can see it from completely both pints of view and I think when you do cycle you do realise like how scary it is with the cars going past you and then I think you do take more awareness when you are then driving, but it’s difficult.
Moderator: Maybe it’s a question of perception that you change (0:53:01)
James: And all round education – re-education.
Joe: Education?  Okay.
Josie: I definitely think they should bring in a law that it’s legal for everyone to have to wear a cycle helmet because I think the problem with cycle helmets is that people don’t think they’re cool because they’re not the most flattering thing to wear but if everyone had to wear one, or they couldn’t go on a bike, then people ..
James: Yes, that’s true.  And reflectors, when it’s sort of like dark or even the first part of dark.  I’ve discarded my reflectors now because I don’t need them but come winter you know I’m going to be like orange man again.
Josie: But you need to be for cars to see you.
James: I appreciate what you are saying about it being scary on bikes because it is, I’ve been cycling for many years and it seems that it’s got worst now than what it was because there are more cars on the road and people in cars do not take into consideration cyclists either motorcyclists don’t forget them or people who use bikes.
Josie: And I think generally people are cycling at rush hour so it’s extra busy with even more cars.
Jean: The thing that made us push to cycle though was the closing of the Heritage Road because it took ages to get into work and we were in traffic queues for ages and it was so much quicker to just cycle.  But I think our work is very good at promoting cycling because they run a scheme whereby you can buy a brand new bike like tax free of something and they will fund you towards the price of your bike, but then again it’s like with everything there’s loads of forms you have to fill in if you want that, but you could get that if you wanted to, and they do cycling proficiency courses - although I think we should go on that.
James: Is that not only with one company at the moment – Halfords?
Jean: I don’t know it’s just on our NHS website.
James: I think you’ll find it’s just with Halfords, which is a shame because it should be with all bikes – Sidwell Street Bikes, The Shed in town, it should be with them all.
Pula: Yes, but again it’s the Government that has set up this scheme for the NHS with Health Visitors.
Jean: But I think the cycling proficiency classes; I think that’s quite ….
Pula: I think it was quite a challenge, I had to go on the internet and look for where the cycle routes where, I don’t think the cycle routes are very well publicised at all.  I think there should be big signs up with where the cycle routes are and things.
Tanya: You hear about these odd little schemes going on but there doesn’t seem to be like one general push towards advertising generally.  You only hear about odd little things going on.
Josie: You normally have to be associated with the company before you get that benefit.
Moderator: What about other means of transport?  Say walking or public transport?  What would attract you to change towards these, Tanya is there any chance of making you change your travel behaviour so to speak?
Tanya: No.  If there’s no incentive but we would all like to think that we care about the environment but if there’s no incentive then at the end of the day you are not going to do it, I don’t think.
Moderator: Can you think about some incentives?
Tanya: If it was quicker and it was cheaper.
Pula: A night bus I reckon from town like they do in Plymouth but they only do them on one route which is stupid for the whole of Plymouth, but a night bus that ran maybe one o’clock, 12 o’clock, 2 o’clock from (0:56:55) 
Becky: We’d be on that!
Pula: We wouldn’t get a taxi, but then saying that actually for five of us to get into a taxi it would probably be the same price as waiting for a bus and not getting a seat on the bus.
Becky: It would have to be about 20 pence each.
Jean: (0:57:13) at work in the NHS well they want you to obviously travel the greenest way as possible to get there, but if you were using your bike for work purposes, if you were going to a meeting and you actually cycled your own bike, you would actually get money back for that, you’d get paid for that.  I suppose in expenses because of wear on your bike.
Moderator: Is it only about green travel or maybe other benefits?
Jean: All travel.  So they’re trying to make it so that you car share to work and do things like that but if you actually used your bike for work purposes to go between different sites and cycle you would actually get paid money.  We were saying does that work just to get to work, like if we actually cycled to work would you get money, but it was like no it’s only once you’re at work.  But I have to say, if the Government said okay, if every employer could get 80% of their workforce some way to travel by public transport, cycle or walk we would give you money which would go towards people’s salary.  So the people who do it, rather than (0:58:19) for me it would have to be a Government thing because we are the NHS or the private companies.  If they could encourage their own, if there was an incentive to say get your employers, most of your employers to do it, have some money.  In some way, it would make you get to work and you’re going to earn money out of it.  You would get more money in your salary because you actually did it that way.  So you’re getting there cheaper because you’re doing it that way and hopefully you will earn more money.
Moderator: So you think the economic factor is important?
Jean: Money is the biggest factor.  If you want an incentive, money is the way.
Becky: I was just saying that I think if Emma said if you walk to work today, I think it would be money, definitely.
James: If you were allowed extra time to actually walk into work, that you were actually paid from the minute you left your door, if you like you clocked in at home.  What an incentive, it’s feasible.
Jean: Yes, that’s what it is.  It’s time and it’s money and that is the biggest thing. 
Pula: I think it’s sad that it has to be about money in the sense that that will make people do it rather than doing it to help the environment, but I think we’re so resentful of what we have to pay out for like taxes, how much petrol is, how much insurance is, that actually it is one of the only driving forces, isn’t it?  Because I would think why should I get paid to do something that’s actually going to benefit myself and my children in the long run but then you do think actually why shouldn’t I get paid.
Joe: And the other way is to like change everyone’s attitude so that it was really like uncool to drive but that’s such a big thing.
Pula: I do think it’s more that people are more encouraged to car share and stuff now I think its’ cooler to share.
Moderator: It seems that you came up with a really interesting thing.  Do you think that there’s a need for a shift to more sustainable travel?
Jean: There is absolutely!  There is because there’s not going to be a petrol shortage so everyone went out and bought their petrol so therefore there was a petrol shortage.
James: Yes, don’t panic!
Jean: And that all of a sudden, it showed that there is a need for people to think how do you manage if you’re not going to have petrol in your own car to get to these places so there is a drive for people to actually think about it.
Josie: People bury their heads in the sand.  It doesn’t affect me, and there’s also that if people have got money they’ll pay their way out of it.  Tell you what put £2 for a litre of petrol rather than £1.20 they’re charging – it’s £2 but it’s here, I’ve got it – yes, I’ll pay it because I need petrol.  And they did.
James: Well they did in (1:01:32) and then he puts his price up to £1.99 and he’s got queues going halfway down the street.  And now they’re slagging him off because he did that, yes okay, he’s going to close his garage soon and he’s panicking like mad because he’s not made as much as his inside information, he’s not made as much money on selling the land that he thought it was going to be so he wants to make a quick buck, but you still had people, willing to do it.  But he gave an incentive; he said here’s a £24 for your next MOT – an incentive.  People still do it, people still pay the money.
Pula: I definitely still think there is a drive towards getting people to think about (1:02:14)
Jean: And also people are getting more and more cars but the infrastructure is not improving so people are queuing.
Josie: I think Devon is quite a strange place anyway because it’s a big county and you’ve got so many little towns and things that are spread out.  Exeter and Plymouth aren’t really that big, and you haven’t got like one huge city so it’s quite a weird place anyway for transport. 
Moderator: Thank you very much.  I just want to mention two things, a little bit related to financial aspects that there are some measures.  What do you think about things like (1:02:57) or congestion charging?
Jean: Well the thing is, in like Europe, again, they have charges on main roads but their petrol is less and their taxes are a lot less, so people don’t mind paying that because overall they still pay a lot less than us.  But here you are saying, prices of petrol is going to be high, price of tax, price of MOT, everything is going to be high and on top of this we want to charge you congestion charges, because like Josie said, the rich people will pay, the congestion is not likely to change and you will just end up paying more.  I don’t necessarily, I think it would make me think twice but that’s because I couldn’t afford to, but the people you really need to target are the ones that ….
Lottie: I actually do agree with the congestion charge probably in London because without a doubt public services are there and great.  I think when you use the bus it’s like two fees it’s like £1 or £1.50 – you pay a set amount, you don’t have to go on there and figure out how much it’s going to be and they’ve got the tubes.  Its advertised, its easy, the publicity on all their transport, so it’s quick it is efficient and it’s the main way they travel, so for people who are then using their cars for certain journeys when maybe they don’t need to.  I can understand it, but the differences down here is that costs of housing, your costs relating to your salaries down here.  In London, people earn a lot more money than they do down here, so if you don’t whack on a congestion charge so to say get into Exeter, people aren’t earning enough money because of the salaries down here.  You can’t afford that.
Josie: And it’s rural, so the public transport system isn’t the same.
Lottie: And people are having to use certain ways of getting in because they do live more rurally, not in a built area of London which goes on for ever and therefore you’ve got this easy transport.  So I think the problem is it’s great to say in some way let’s look how the congestion charge works in London, people have got big bucks up there and there’s a lot of money up there.  Let’s look how it works in this big city but hang on a minute, come down to here, salaries are a lot different, so therefore you can’t relate what happens in one part of the country to another, unless you look at the actual bigger picture, which is why you have to think about it, really county by county, or even town on town really.
Josie: I think it’s where Government schemes go wrong they try to generalise things nationwide.  Most of them don’t have a clue about how Devon works.
Moderator: So it’s more the responsibility of the local government that they should take more action?
Lottie: I think you need to have local schemes for the local place because they are different.  I do think that it is a lot different down here because people do travel a lot further.  People travel or live in rural villages and that’s part of living down here, people understand that they will have to travel to get to their work.
James: A case in point again, they’re going to build I think 750 houses across at Rockby but nowhere have they actually said that there’s going to be an increase in public transport between Rockby and Exeter.  And you think, well hang on a bit, you know you should have thought about the whole thing all the way through before you actually gave planning permission for that to happen, you should have said well how many bus stops are there going to be in Rockby, how many buses are there going to be to Rockby.  I think they were thinking of building an extra railway station in there, they don’t seem to think things through.
Jean: They make new towns, they make new little villages and build all these houses but those people have also got to work and they’re not going to work in those little villages because the jobs aren’t there, the jobs are in the city.  So they’ve got to get from where they’ve built all these lovely housing estates, that’s where everybody is going to live, but they’ve got to work.
Pula: It’s like we were talking about how we, because we were talking about it coming over in the car, how we were getting here, we were like how could we have got here.  We would have to have got two buses to get here from where we live and we wouldn’t have come because it’s just for a Friday evening you don’t want to spend a Friday evening getting two buses and like (1:07:24) there’s a lot of people that live on Kings Heath, why can’t you get a bus.
Lottie: Isn’t there a bus stop there, I’ve never seen one.
Pula: At Digby, but that’s only the one to town, that’s like a park and ride bus.
Joe: The D bus from Tescos comes straight here though.
Pula: Oh does it?
Joe: This one stops in the evening.
James: Yes, there’s no buses now, I don’t mind walking back into town to get a bus in but there’s no H2 on a Sunday, there’s no Ds on a Sunday.
Tanya: You see that’s the reason, there’s no consistency, you can’t just think I’ll just hop on this bus you actually have to find out when they stop, when they start.
James: No disrespect to yourselves, but on your blurb about getting here you said about the D bus 7.45, when I got the D bus in and that’s the reason why I came in almost late, almost the last ones.  Just in time, because it wasn’t convenient and this is the whole thing about public transport it’s supposed to be convenient but it isn’t.
Jean: But the thing that I don’t get is how can it be convenient in other places, that’s what I don’t get,  I really didn’t think at all when I was on holiday about how I was getting from A to B.  I don’t understand really where we go wrong.
James: You know there’s Kings Heath and then there’s going to be where the old Royal Navy storage, they’re building I think 700 houses there.  Now there’s a lot of hassle about Tompton Road which is a busy road anyway and feeding from this new estate into Tompton Road one way and feeding out into town the other way, Tescos actually said that they would build another road to get into that estate and they’ve not been allowed to do it.  Tescos, they said they would pay for the whole lot, didn’t they?  They said they’d pay for the whole lot and they’ve not been allowed to do it and that’s wrong.  If some big company is willing to pay for that to happen like your schemes at work, if they’re willing to pay, why can’t the people that are in charge say well okay what a damn good idea.  Let’s do it.
Josie: I do think that one of the problems with Exeter Council or whoever does it, they do have, they tend to cause congestion in lots of places by the way they narrow the roads.  Sorry?
James: Dig up roads!
Josie: Well not so much, but whereas you go somewhere like Plymouth and its wide open roads and the traffic is in and its moving and they can get the traffic out and off you go.  Exeter seems to narrow roads down, then they’re causing congestion, then they say well how are we going to deal with this congestion, but they’ve caused it in the first place.  I think Parish Street is a prime example from New North Road you go down here, go straight up to Parish Street, straight the way across down to the roundabout.  Now, they take you up Civil Street, to the traffic lights, all the way down and round.  It just causes congestion
James: But from the 22nd of, I think it’s this month, they’re closing this link road up from the bus stop into Sidwell Street, at the moment cars and taxis can go up there, but they’re closing that and it’s only going to be buses.  But where are the cars etc going to go when they close that road, they’re going to move a bit further along so therefore it’s going to make congestion, again.
Josie: And like when they closed (1:11:33) as well, that just caused absolute mayhem because they closed one road.
Tanya: Because you lived right in the middle of it didn’t you?
Josie: It just shows how much reliance there is on that one road.
Tanya: But there was talk at one time of actually making that one way wasn’t there?  They thought about that.  It’s like making the whole of Exeter a one way system – it’s like gridlocked for ages.
Pula: My parents live in Plymouth and they don’t own a car, they’ve never been able to drive and they live about 7 miles out of Plymouth, and they don’t need a car, they don’t need one.  They get the bus or walk everywhere and when I was growing up I never felt like I needed a car that’s why I didn’t take my driving test until I was quite old because it wasn’t until I lived in Exeter and I started working that I wanted a car that I took my driving test, but they’re not inconvenienced.  Sometimes I think they’re inconvenienced by it because to go from their house in Plymouth to  my house in Exeter is quite a long way, but for day to day stuff, they’ve no need for one because the buses are on time and there are lots of buses and there’s lots of different buses they can get and it’s easy.  It’s really easy and they don’t live near where they work, my Dad cycles 45 minutes in the morning and my Mum gets the bus, but it’s just easy and that’s 45 minutes away from here, it’s not far.  Plymouth is not that far.
Moderator: Just an additional thing regarding measures.  Things like, I’m going to mention some things to you and maybe if you’ve heard about that, and if not it’s also okay.  Things like green travel plans or the green travel week or something like that?  Did you hear about that, no?
Pula: Bike Week – 14th to the 23rd
Moderator: Bike Week?  OK.  You know that one.
Pula: I know that one from work, because at work they’ll promote that.
Moderator: Did someone mention car sharing schemes?
Josie: Because on the roads, I drive from Exeter to Torquay, when it goes down to single lanes they’ve got signs as you go along, why not think about car sharing, why not go onto this website and link up with car sharing schemes.  At work you can (1:14:03) at the hospital but if you car share it’s cheaper for you so your car parking permit would be a lot cheaper because you’re car sharing, so that’s like the scheme they do to encourage that.
Jean: And is it Bristol where they’ve got car sharing lanes as well as bus lanes or maybe it’s the bus lanes so you skip all your congestion.
Moderator: How do they monitor that though?
Jean: They’ve got cameras and things.  You need two or more in and then you can go in the bus lane.
Joe: I think in the United States, that’s relatively popular.  High occupied vehicle lanes they call it, those are controlled.
Jean: But you would need to be in a place where you’ve got lots of lanes wouldn’t you, so it wouldn’t necessarily work.
Tanya: There isn’t a wide enough bit in Exeter.
Moderator: Is anybody aware of a thing called Travel Smart in Exeter?  It’s another project, does anybody know about that?  No?  It’s okay.  My last question related to sustainable travel is do you think that if people think about asking people to act more sustainable or more environmentally friendly this should always include travelling for holidays, let’s say ask people to travel to different destinations or travel less?
Lottie: I think it’s very difficult down here because to get anywhere you really have to take some sort of transport because we’re not in a big city you’ve usually got to make your way.
Rosie: I suppose you could argue that down here we’re in an area where people come on holiday so technically doing it to …
Pula: I think it’s hard because you’re always going to want to go abroad on holiday and actually to do that sustainably I’d get to perhaps Exmouth at a push on my bike.
Moderator: And that’s obviously not far enough for you?
Tanya: I think you’re taking away people’s free will to travel.
Jean: Maybe you should look at a tax and how much tax you get per flight depending on how far you go.  Is it more economical to fly further away then it is closest?  So maybe tax closer flights, I don’t know, I don’t know how it works.  But then you’re coming back to people who can afford it.  If you put the taxes up people who can afford to will go.
James: And would you not have to employ more people to actually keep a track of it all?
Jean: What you mean, what’s taxed with what?
James: With anything along those lines, somebody’s got to be accountable for it, for those things to actually be in black and white for people to get money back, somebody’s got to work that out in the first place.  How would that work?
Jean: I thought they did it now, I thought they looked at…  Just because I’ve been back to Madrid I’m sure they said, there was a flyer about your CO2 emissions flying to Madrid and your CO2 emissions if you flew to Florida or something and then how much you got taxed in relation to your CO2 emissions, but I don’t know.
Tanya: I think when you look at the flights I think this is why a lot of the airlines advertise really cheap flights because they have to fill the plane don’t they?  Because the more people on the plane, it’s better for the environment than if the plane’s being flown half empty.
James: Hence being able to give away practically a lot of tickets because that’s what they’ve been told that they’ve got to do that so therefore they know they’ve got to make the tickets cheaper because they are going to be fined.  Is that sustainable?  No.
Moderator: There’s one thing that’s pretty much related to the things Jean mentioned.  Do you know so-called Carbon Offsetting Schemes for flying?  
James: That’s the CO2 thing that you talked about?
Moderator: Quite.  Not so much but yes.
Josie: You don’t mean like a company like a big company are taking so many flights will buy so many bits of land and put so many trees on it to offset the …. Our Company makes so many flights a year which does so much therefore we’ve bought this amount of land in this country, put a load of trees and therefore …
Moderator: That’s pretty much it, yes.
Josie: I think it might be a simplistic view for me, but I would also say, do they really do that?  
Jean: It’s not quite as simple as A plus B equals C, (1:19:08)
Josie: Because if I was a big company and I went to cover my flight by planting a tree for you, they’d say excellent that’s okay, but I would say, I’ve got your money.
James: It was like when the EU started they were actually paying farmers to grow olive trees on bits of land that the farmers would never ever sustain these olive trees, so they got the money and another thing, does it say somewhere along the line what type of tree, whether it is a tree that could be used for paper or whatever, you could get paid for putting a tree on there and the tree’s useless as a sustainable crop, if you like.  It’s like rape seed oil, the yellow flowers in the fields that give everybody hay fever, absolute murder, and it becomes a bio-field and that bio-field the farmers get a lot more money and it needn’t necessarily be used as a bio-field.
Joe: And you’re still not solving the problems initially are you, (1:20:29).
Moderator: I have one more point on my list.  A little less about transport but maybe you can explain to me what do you do to behave more sustainable or more environmentally friendly at home, in your house, do you do things there?  Rosie, maybe?
Rosie: Sorry, say that again?
Moderator: Behaving environmentally at your house, at home – do you do things?  Can you think of something?
Rosie: No, not really.  I do switch things off; I don’t leave them on stand by and that.  I just switch them off.
Moderator: Well, that’s one thing.  Anything else, anybody?
Becky: At work, soon they’re going to start charging for carrier bags and stuff, do you know what I mean, that’s the same sort of thing.
Rosie: Yes, they’ve started that in a lot of shops now.
Becky: And like now, we’ve been asked to say do you need a bag?  Before we’d just stuff it in, you know what I mean, we didn’t really care.
Lottie: They’ve started saying that at Tescos now.  It’s one more question that they ask you, it’s like have you got a Club Card?  And now, it’s like do you need a bag?  Yes!
James: Energy saving bulbs
Becky: Some places have switched to paper as well.  Like in America I know they use a lot of paper bags now, most places do in America, and we’re not doing it here.  I don’t understand why and it’s still because they think it’s too much but if they really want to sort out the environment, they should use it, but they don’t.
Moderator: James, you mentioned energy saving bulbs.  Do you have them at home?
James: Every single one of my things has got an energy saving bulb.  Every single one.  I’m supposed to be getting 4 free from British Gas but I still haven’t got them yet.
Becky: They do last a lot longer don’t they?
James: Yes, they’re fantastic.  A lot of people, criticism about them is if you’ve got a bulb on a landing for instance, the fact that they do take an awful long time to get brighter, now if they could just crack that somehow, then I think a lot more people would actually use them, because that is a pain you know with the fact that by the end of the evening you need sunglasses on, but at the beginning of the evening it is a nuisance.  I think they’re brilliant.  But they did have that scare about the mercury though, didn’t they?  Because that’s part and parcel of it.  I remember reading about if you drop an energy saving bulb, I was taught how to clear this mess up, so that mercury doesn’t go anywhere near me.  Right, OK then, panic!  You know, I’m not going to buy that, well I am, but a lot of people think I’m not going to buy that because it’s not safe, and its rubbish, they are safe.
Pula: I think stuff like, just going back to the home stuff, like online banking so you don’t have so many bank statements.
Jean: But we don’t have the internet so we now don’t know how much is in our bank accounts.
Pula: From one of my bank accounts, I get sent so much junk and it is really nice to not get sent that every month and Emily our house mate, just gets it worst.
Jean: It’s probably a lot safer for us actually not to have things sent through the post on how much money we’ve got.  We save by, this is just for time, on our washing machine we always put it on the quick wash, because the normal wash does take ages, and on the quick wash it’s only an hour so it must use, I would imagine, less energy because it’s less time and also probably less water as well.  So we do that.
Pula: We have showers.
Jean: I scowl when you say you’re going to have a bath, I like to think of my water.
James: Because you’re on water meters aren’t you?
Jean: Yes.  Because we’re on a water meter.  Actually it does, if you’re on a water meter you think about how much water you use.  Whereas I do know that my parents aren’t on one and like if I went there I’m allowed a bath!  For them it still costs to heat it up but you actually don’t, because they’re on a water rate, so it certainly doesn’t really matter.
James: Well, (1:25:01) whenever she has a bath, she leaves the bath water in and flushes the toilet with the bath and you have to do it, and if I inadvertently flush the toilet I get my throat cut because that’s what you do.  You just do it, even the kids, you know Millie, she’s 8 years old, she’s just learned to pick up the bucket that she keeps in the bath to flush the toilet, but she’s learning.
Jean: If you learn to do it and you do that, then it’s ….
James: It’s second nature.
Jean: I’m sure that when I grew up, 15 – 20 years ago we used to throw away everything apart from maybe paper and now its paper, glass, plastic, everything we now recycle, whereas at one point you just threw it all away, but now you actually don’t.
James: I was as guilty as anything. I think that’s why I do it a lot more maybe than some other people do because of my age.  I did used to throw away an awful lot of stuff and it’s awful.  If I was to take a little time trip back and see all the garbage that isn’t garbage that is good stuff, like paper for instance, cardboard, or whatever and there’s no excuse because if you go into a supermarket now there is a little tiny symbol and it’s down to you to buy the stuff if you’re really seriously into recycling that’s got that symbol on it.  It doesn’t take two minutes.
Moderator: So do you think it is necessary to do these things?  Recycling, energy saving?
James: Of course.  The world’s dying anyway; let’s not make it any faster.
Moderator: Tanya, what do you think?
Tanya: I don’t know really.  We do recycle, definitely.  
Moderator: Why?
Tanya: Because you have to!
Pula: That (1:27:08) it is really good and everything …
Tanya: You get fined if you don’t now though, don’t you?
Rosie: Yes.  Quite a bit
Tanya: Best just to do it really!
Rosie: If you put it in the wrong, you know ….
Pula: Yes, it is good to do it but it does (1:27:26) like the Government is going on and on about recycling but you look at what they’re doing and they’re not …
Jean: It’s just one rule for them
Pula: And the things they could do that would make a much bigger difference than everyone recycling.
Tanya: Why not put solar panels on all new build houses or something.
James: Exactly!
Moderator: OK, thank you very much, that was an interesting discussion, maybe it was interesting for you too, I don’t know.  The very last thing I want to ask you is to just answer one more question, it’s only four questions.  If you could just put your name in and make some marks.  One more, you may have to share it.  And I’ll come around and give you your money!