Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: You shouldn’t be concerned about these things.  You know you were told we want your comments and opinions and behaviour and therefore we obviously have to tape it.  It is definitely not linked to your name or to your address or what else. I don’t store these things so it is completely anonymous.
Lotty: Just to prove we are here?  Is that it?
Moderator: No.  That’s another thing.  When I give you your money you have to prove that you have been here because otherwise they think I have just taken it.
Lotty: Gone on holiday?
Moderator: Yes.  Ok.  Welcome everybody.  Nice to have you here.  It’s really appreciated that you can contribute to our project.  My name is Moderator.  I’m a researcher here at Exeter University.  At the department of Geography. And we are having a project on travel behaviour.  We are asking people in Exeter in two different places how they behave, what they use for their daily travel, if they go on holiday what they use there. And all those issues.  And we want to extract some things for possible measures, you know, to improve lets say some policy and planning measures and we want to ask you about your opinion with regard to these things a little bit later.  The meeting will last approximately 90 minutes I have to say. Sometimes if it goes well people just can’t stop and then I have to intervene and say ok we are running out of time but I would kindly ask you let just one person at a time speak because otherwise it’s hard for the people to recognise who is speaking and to disentangle these sentences. OK. The first thing I would ask you is just a short introduction round, starting to my left maybe. My name is Moderator as I said and yes, beginning with you?
Thomas: I’m Thomas and I’m 16. I’ve finished my GCSEs and I’m going off to do A Levels now so it’s very exciting.
Gareth: My name is Gareth.  73. I am now retired. I’ve been an electrical engineer through many years in parts of the country and it’s time now… well I’ve done quite a bit of travelling, I think anyway, but I’d like to do a bit more.  But it’s all a question of where you go, when you go and why. 
Emily : Emily and I am a teaching assistant. [3.18]
Tamsin: My name is Tamsin.  I’ve just graduated from Exeter. I’ve been here for 3 years. I’m moving to London to start a job.
Jean: I’m Jean.  I’ve also been a student here for the last 3 years. And I am going to do a Masters.
Chris: I’m Chris and I have also just done my degree and my third year and I did a degree in History.
Roy: I’m Roy.  I’ve just finished my third year doing Geography.  And I have no idea what I am going to do.
Lotty: I’m Lotty and I am retired.  We’ve travelled a great deal in the last 14 years. But we’ve had to curtail it the last two years because I’ve had some health problems and we’ve not been able to do as much but hope possible to do in the future.
Dick: Well that applies to me more or less.  I am her husband. My name is Dick.  We live at Pennsylvania. That’s why we were the last getting here.
Moderator: It’s always the same. But as I said before nearly everybody is from Pennsylvania because we….. Sorry?  So you are married?
Dick: We are married yes.
Moderator: For how long?
Dick: Well we are rapidly approaching 60 years yes.
Moderator: Wow. For me it’s 3 weeks now.
Lotty: Quite a contrast!
Moderator: Thank you very much.  I want to start with some first thing – just very quickly I want you to consider your modes for daily travel.  That means if you go … if you leave your house, if you go to the shop, if you go to…I don’t know. You’ve been asked that before maybe, but just to let you think about it. It’s enough to fill in your first name and if you don’t know exactly just do a couple of things.  I don’t have pens for everybody so if anybody has a pen.  Do you want to fill it in together or separately?  
Lotty: No, we’ll fill it in separately because we both have…..
Dick: This is the point……our travelling in the last year or so has changed tremendously. What we are doing now rather than what we were doing?
Moderator: Both.  I’ll ask you about the changes later but that’s an important for us.
Dick : But this is just what we are doing now?
Moderator: Yes  [silence whilst group writing]  Ok.  It’s not that important that it is absolutely correct.  We just want to have some clues to go on with.  The first question I want to ask you is the whole group of people, and whoever wants to answer it can go first.  Which modes of transport do you usually use? And they different for different purposes?  I mean you just collect a couple of them and then maybe we consider it first.
Dick: Well we use the bus probably more times then anything else.
Moderator: Ok
Dick : Because we live in Exeter, so you don’t need to go very far.
Lotty: Or train if we are going along distance and the reluctant alternative is the car.
Gareth: Yes.  I am much the same.  I live in Pennsylvania and travel down to the town quite often but most times I take a car, can’t get out of the square or perhaps a train if I am going up to see my family further up country.
Jean: I can generally walk everywhere in Exeter unless I am feeling lazy and then I drive to the gym or something.  Whereas if we are going to the countryside or day trips I think you can take the train instead of the car when it’s not walkable.
Moderator: Thank you.  Jean?  I just need to keep it in mind.  Thanks a lot.  Is anybody maybe using the car more often?  Maybe not you Thomas. What do you use?
Thomas: Well I find myself increasingly using the bus to see friends in places like Craditon, just outside Exeter. The train. But I tend to use the bus more even though it’s about 3 times more expensive.  Just more practical when you are sort of rushed with exams and you don’t want to spend ages planning your life, the bus seems a lot more convenient for me. But I try to walk as may places as possible or take my bike because it’s cheaper.
Moderator: Ok. thanks.  Emily what about you?
Emily: I use the car everyday to go to work.  Mainly because if I caught a bus I would have 3 buses to catch to get to work and that is time as well its not just the inconvenience of having to do it – you are up against time first thing in the morning.  But weekends I walk into town – if I am shopping I just walk into town and walk home ago.  And then if we go out we usually walk or travel somewhere in the car and then we do our walk from there. But really it’s more convenient.  And time.
Jean: If you walk or go by car you can generally do what you want to do, whereas you’ve got to abide by the trains timetables.
Emily: That’s right and if you want to get to work it’s 3 buses….. you need to get to actually.  But when I retire I think I might use the bus more because I’ll get a bus pass!
Moderator: I think there’s plenty of time left, I guess.
Dick: I forgot my bus pass the day before, and it cost me £2.40 to get to town and back.
Tamsin: I have never used a bus in Exeter.  I think it’s too over priced.  They don’t give student discount – I think that’s really bad.  I tend to walk or I cycle quite a lot but I’ve also got my own car but that’s mainly used for the weekly shop – we all jump in and share.  Or if I am running really late for something.  I’ve only used it twice on campus but that was theatre related so having to offload stuff.  But mostly biking.
Moderator: Thank you Tamsin.  Chris? Additionally for you, you just agreed.  What do you use and maybe what do you like about the modes of transport you use?
Jo: Mostly when I am in Exeter I do walk because I don’t live that far away so I walk to campus or I walk into town and then as Tamsin said if she is going shopping then I use my car, because I have my car down here as well or if we go on day trips we use the cars as well and you know we all share petrol and things like that.  But I quite like walking around here because nothing is really that far.
Moderator: OK.  Thanks.  Let me ask David?
David: Yes. I am the same.  If I am here I walk everywhere but at home I sort of live in the middle of nowhere so I have to drive.  There’s one bus a day from where I live so I mean public transport is just not an option. I have to drive everywhere.  If I could…if trains or buses were more convenient then I would consider them but they are just not really an option.  
Tamsin: Exactly and expensive.
David: Yes and its expensive.
Moderator: So in general do you wish you could use other modes; for instance you said that you have to drive a car?
David: Yes, if it was more convenient. Like when I used to go to school I always used to catch the bus to school because it was free and I lived miles away from school..  but yeah most of the time it’s more a matter of convenience more than anything else.
Gareth: I think the bus service could be improved an awful lot.  I find this problem.  If I go to the hospital, you’ve got to go into town, that’s the problem.
Lotty / Dick: Yes.
Gareth: It’s easier to take the cart or walk.  But if the transport was there, I would put my car to one side and that would it.
Dick: It’s interesting this.  When I go to the rugby I walk down into the town and now I am just very short of 80 I tend to not to walk up Pennsylvania Road because of the hill so I mean… in the last year I don’t suppose I walked up from town more than about 5 times if that.
Gareth.:  No, I am the same.  And it depends on the timing of the buses doesn’t it?  Where I am I can walk down the road near the pub, there’s 3 coaches there which would take me into town if I need to go.  Fine, but where you are you are on a P bus I expect?
Dick / Lotty: Yes
Gareth: You get once every half hour or so don’t you?
Dick: 3 an hour yes.
Lotty: There used to be a bus that came along in the road and went over to the hospital some years ago because I did some voluntary work at that time and I used to catch that.  And for some reason they changed it.  So there is no transport from this side of town direct to the hospital.
Moderator: Ok.  Thank you Lotty.
Dick: Can I make a comment?  What struck me as interesting is that you are the only one that has mentioned that you cycle?  And you did?  Yes.  It’s… I think the time is coming then where there are going to be more and more people are going to have to cycle.  I mean we both used to cycle when we were younger.
Lotty: It’s the hills that does it!
Tamsin: You don’t need to join the gym just cycle.
Lotty: I’m sorry my legs are too old now.
Dick: But where I grew up in the countryside in Gloucestershire, well I used to walk 3 miles to school and back everyday.  And that was the kind of normal thing you know. There was nothing untoward about that at all.  But these days of course, somebody mentioned convenience and quite frankly that’s an awful lot of what we do is whether it is convenient.  We can afford it so it’s convenient.  If we can’t afford it of course then you have to think of other things.
Tamsin: Because of the petrol prices my car sat outside the front of my house for the last 2 weeks I haven’t touched it.
Lotty: Concentrated your mind.
Tamsin: Far too much money.
Lotty: It is a lot of money
Moderator: Tamsin, you brought up an interesting point.  I have it on my list already.  I wanted to ask you , did your travel behaviour or your daily travel change lets say during last month or maybe also if you could think about if not, when it changed the last time.  You just said you leave your car at home?
Tamsin: Definitely when the petrol prices went up.  I had to stop using the car pretty much unless we need to…. We haven’t got much food.  But when we do go shopping we use the car.  But I travel quite a lot on train to and from London anyway so that has cut out the car as well. But definitely since the petrol.
Lotty: Yes, we used to drive a lot more up to London. We have family up here. But now we take the train most times up to London.  And also we had a business in Tibberton before we retired and we used to drive from here to Tibberton and back so it was nice when we retired we could walk into town from where we are at Pennsylvania. And we used to walk up as well, but that’s changed!  With advancing years.
Moderator: So you also had to travel a lot for your business then?
Lotty: Yes.  6 days a week.
Dick: We were newsagent and our first business in this part of the world was in Exeter and then due to various things we finished up owning a business in Tibberton but we did go to live in Tibberton for a short while for convenience we thought. But in actual fact because all our social life was down in Exeter, we found it much more convenient to live in Exeter and then travel up to Tibberton each day. Sometimes I would go up by the bus because I had staff of course so I didn’t have to be so tied.  But usually of course it was the car you had to take, normally the van.
Moderator: Thank you Dick.  Emily?  Do you have to travel for working too?
Emily: Yes.
Moderator: And in general do you have to travel a lot?  Maybe you can explain?
Emily: Its about 4 miles nearly 5 miles to work, and 5 miles home again.  It’s too far to walk although I like walking.  But then you are against time again and convenience in the morning.  Cycling could be a possibility but then it the hill coming home at the end of the day!  Going to work in the morning would be fine.  
Moderator: Just on the hill I guess?
Emily: Yes
Moderator: And for you did something change in the last months or….?
Emily: I think twice if I used the car for shopping as before sometimes I think oh I’ll just nip to Sainsbury’s for something, but I don’t do that anymore. I try and think and plan a little bit more ahead and be a little bit more organised. And if we go out for a meal of an evening, we perhaps don’t go quite so far.  You think oh where is the nearest….. like the George and the Dragon or the Barn Owl – well we’ll go to the Barn Owl it’s the same people so we go to the Barn Owl because it is slightly nearer. So you do think actually about or plan where you are going a little bit more I think then what we did before.  You’d just jump in the car and go wherever you would want to go. We plan it a little bit better now.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks a lot.  Another general question for everybody.  Some people already mentioned that, but do you wish you could use other modes of transport sometimes for some purposes, for some trips. And if why… can’t you use them? Or why don’t you use them?  Anybody?
Thomas: Well I have a bit of trouble some days a week because I play various sorts of instruments so sometimes, there’s been occasions where I’ve had to take my guitar, my sax and my violin to school all on the same day and its not really very convenient to walk so, you sort of end up thinking well, my parents leave the house at…..so I can either try and steal a lift or try and get the bus.  But unfortunately to get the bus I might as well just walk for the detour I would have to take to get on it.  So I find that that….when people say of like its too much hassle to walk places, for quite a while I used to think well you know if you just time organised and was earlier and thought about it surely you could drop it but when you start to think about practical issues like taking things, you suddenly start to realise…. Oh mum can I have a lift?
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks. Anybody else maybe.
Jean: I always feel I should use public transport as much as possible but again if you are carrying things, even on trains, I worry about leaving suitcase because it’s full of valuable stuff. And I always have to keep an eye in it.  I don’t know. I think you should.  A lot of people don’t.  And I quite enjoy driving as well.  So yes.
Moderator: Yes it’s ok. David?
David: Yes like I said I would rather take public transport if I could but I mean the whole carrying things issue. Going to and from Uni is not really very practical on the bus or well…[23.26] but yeah at home if public transport was easier then I would use it.  Like going up to London, I wouldn’t think of driving, just because a) it’s London, but public transport is so much more convenient in that sort of respect.
Moderator: In London?
David: Yes in London and getting to London is a lot easier on public transport.  And cheaper. And you don’t have the hassle of congestion charges or parking.  Yeah.  It’s a lot easier on public transport.  But generally speaking, it’s not convenient enough in…especially like on  a local scale, I mean its different in a city but when you are sort of more in the countryside there are a lot sort of fewer options in terms public transport.
Moderator: Definitely.  Thanks.  As you mentioned it’s cheaper so price is definitely an issue for you?
Tamsin: Yes [24.28] if you book a month in advance.  So these websites as well that I’ve only been introduced to since i have been at university for really cheap travel to London.  I’m from the Midlands so even from here to the Midlands is a lot cheaper then it would be to drive. And that also changes what time  I would get…. What my schedule for things, because the cheaper trains are either very early in the morning or very late at night, so that alters my travelling plans as well.
Dick: There’s only about 6 hours I think. 3 in the morning and 3 in the afternoon where you have to pay more or can’t.. are not allowed to travel because we always try to travel off peak because of this.  I mean it isn’t that we can’t afford it its just that we don’t like spending our money!
Tamsin: It’s the same as well.  If I know I can get it cheaper, its not that I can’t afford it, I’m not stupid but….
Lotty: Its human nature isn’t it?
Tamsin: Yes absolutely.
Dick: I can make a suggestion to the lady about travelling with valuable luggage.  If you go to the problem of booking a seat you can book a seat on most of the buses…trains these days – you can put a piece of luggage which is not too big in between… there is a luggage space in between the two seats.  That’s the one thing.  And the second thing is if you have got a big piece then you can always book a seat that is somewhere near the entrance.  And that would solve you the problem about worrying about it.
Moderator: It seems that you are a frequent traveller on trains aren’t you?
Dick: We are yes, we are reasonably.  Not just recently because of my wife’s health but yes we’ve done a lot of travelling on trains.  All over the world actually.
Lotty: The trains up to London they’ve changed the seating.  These new ones – it’s more compact.  And I don’t know whether they’ve left the space no between the seats.
Dick: I hadn’t really noticed that.  I know there is less knee room.
Tamsin: They’ve got in the middle of the trains, they’ve got like a luggage bit where you all pile your luggage on.
Lotty: Is that on the Virgin train?
Tamsin: Yes
Lotty: They haven’t got it on First Western up to London.  It’s up the end.  So…
Dick: I think that’s the only place they’ve got it.  How big a piece of luggage do you carry?
Jean: I don’t always use the train but normally I have a massive suitcase going back….
Dick: Ah yes.  I know, yes.  So there’s not reason to put it on a luggage rack not unless you want to get crushed half way.  But that’s why I say if you book a seat somewhere near the entrance you would find that you were very close.  And in any case with a massive piece of luggage you don’t need to worry too much because there’s not many people would try to pinch it anyway!
Moderator: Once is enough.
Dick: Well that’s true.
Moderator: That brings me to another point on my list.  First I have to say the food has to go definitely, so if you need some plates you can take some plates, its’ really… some people have said it’s delicious.
Lotty: What’s in these?
Emily: It’s chicken and it’s very nice.
Lotty: Oh is it?  Alright I’ll give it a try then.  Thank you.
Moderator: But you just brought up the train travel…… [general talk about food]  I want you to think about holiday travel in general.  And you said you use the train within britain, sometimes it is going aboard, sometimes…I would ask you how often do you go on holidays and what are your preferred destinations and of course what do you use to got here? Maybe Gareth first.
Gareth: Well more recently its aircraft.  I suppose partly because of availability.  It’s much easier that it used to be.  If I go far enough I used to take the car across to France, Switzerland, Italy.  But I don’t do that very much at all now.  But mainly its aircraft.  I don’t go by package deal very often I do my own arrangements over the computer, but I still travel around a reasonable amount of time.  We try to go about 3 times a year.  What else can I tell you?
Moderator: Oh that’s fine, really.  So you said it changed a little bit within the last couple of years.
Gareth: It has over many years yes. Especially when the children were younger you see. It was far cheaper to go across the channel.  We were exploring in those early days.  Now we’ve found ourselves in a better situation.  We like to travel more easily and perhaps to get to a city like Madrid or something like that where before it was… because the children were young with the coast.  And then we had more flexibility. We don’t need to travel in the same way we used to travel.  Albeit there have been occasions we have flown to Spain and hired a car there and travelled around Cordoba and Rhonda and places like that.  And that’s been very nice.  It depends what you want at the time doesn’t it?  That’s what it comes down to.  One thing we are finding is we are finding more visits to cities to see the culture and such things around what’s available.
Moderator: Ok.  Thank you Gareth.  Who else is travelling maybe for a holiday?  Tamsin?
Tamsin: My holiday is minimum once a year.  Mainly for longer though because we’ve had the massive summer holidays these last 3 years.  Inter-railing is brilliant.  And that was mostly all the train and one ferry boat – a train ferry which i think it is.  Flying as well because that’s cheap.  I haven’t taken the car abroad but we do normally hire cars or motorbike.  Yeah, plane, flight [31.09]
Moderator: Ok.  David?  It’s different for you or…?
David: Yes.  I probably travel..Sorry go on holiday 2 or 3 times a year if I can. And yeah, I mean recently it’s mainly been plane.  And then sort of bus or train around when you get here.  But, well, I know a few times because of cost I’ve gone on coach or on the train or whatever.  But either because or cost or because it’s been sort of easier or whatever.  But yeah generally speaking just because flying is so cheap, well relatively cheap.  It’s probably why I use it most.
Moderator: Emily?  Do you fly a lot? Or what do you use?
Emily: Yes.  We do.  We usually have 2 holidays.  A summer holiday and a winter holiday.  And our destination in the last few years has been Austria.  It’s just a lovely country – you can walk there, they have so much to offer there.  Even in the winter, they open up the pass to walk depending obviously which area you go to.  But when we are abroad we do use public transport.  Always.
Moderator: So do you think it’s different to your travel behaviour here if you are there?
Emily: Yes.  And its so cheap aborad and it seems.. To be more frequent. We just generally…we never ever hire a car abroad, we always use public transport – train or buses, or bikes we hire, sometimes motorbikes.  Just depends where we are.  But in Austria we usually walk quite a lot.  
Moderator: It’s nice to walk there.
Emily: Yes.  It’s a nice country.
Chares: Peoples holidays have changed, what they do, hasn’t it?  Over time.  Talking about Austria. My first time was skiing.
Emily: Yes.
Dick: Do you go for skiing?
Emily: We did cross country walking last year.  It was really good.  Because i do quite  bit of sport at home I play racket ball, badminton and squash, I really don’t want an injury so I kept off the skis.  For skiing so.
Moderator: Ok.
Dick: We are in a rather difficult position.  Our daughter and granddaughter live in New Zealand and it’s a little bit more difficult.  I’m an ex-merchant officer, and I would love to take a vessel or ship there but it would take 6 weeks to get there and 6 weeks to get back.  So it’s a little bit more difficult.  But we always take the train to get to the airport and it’s…well when we are there we usually hire a car even though she lives in Wellington and we don’t use it in Wellington hardly at all because the public transport is so good in Wellington.  By the way if anybody wants to go to New Zealand, Wellington is….well new Zealand is marvellous but Wellington is a lovely city.  But anyway other than that, we like to go to the Isles of Scilly.  Again difficult to get to.  We always used to take the train down and then catch the boat over – that’s my seamen see?  Lots of people won’t go on the boat because it is a bit flat bottomed and it goes like that. But nowadays, for convenience – we are all talking about convenience. We tend to fly from Exeter airport, direct into the Isles of Scilly.  But by the way you young people, if you want a marvellous holiday, get a job on the Isles of Scilly for the summer.  Alright?  You get paid. Not a lot. You get your food and accommodation all supplied and it is a most marvellous part of the world.  Anybody else been to the Isles of Scilly? Oh it’s fantastic.
Lotty: We’ve taken train journeys in new Zealand and Australia, Mexico, the old …Canada and the States.
Dick: Norway.
Lotty: Yes Norway, two years ago.  So we have used the trains quite a lot in different countries.
Dick: I think train travel is a wonderful way of travelling.  I mean you talk about convenience.  We were going to York from here.  And due to flooding north of Bristol, there were no trains going, so I had to drive.  It took me an hour longer to drive to York than it would have done if I had gone by train.
Lotty: We didn’t have the choice though.
Dick: We didn’t have the choice.  We all think about driving as being convenient and quick but in actual when you start boiling a lot of it down, even going to London you really should take at least one decent break if not two if only to make sure that you arrive safely an not get too tired. But that apart, when you start taking all those things in, it really works out that train travel is very convenient and quite time saving too.
Gareth: It’s very clean too on the continent isn’t it?  Italy and Spain?
Dick: Oh yes. Germany is fantastic.
All talking: 
Emily: Apart from south of Rome. If you try and get to Italy, south of Rome it took from Sicily back up to Niece it took 36 hours because they went….it just really slows [36.57]. We arrived in Sicily and we said when we get back, when is the next train?  The next train was October and this was August.  So we ha to jump on  private train and pretend we didn’t know what they were talking about it.
Lotty: Comes in handy doesn’t it?
Dick: It’s that marvellous smile that gets you away.
Gareth: They are beautifully clean though aren’t they generally on the continent?  Nicely decorated, loads of space, behind the seats they’ve got extra trays for you out anything on you want. I’ve been to Spain quite a lot and the travelling there across Spain is very impressive to me.
Lotty: Yes so I’ve heard.
Gareth: A double decker you can go on sometimes.
David: Oh the double deckers in France are awesome.
Emily: They’re brilliant.  Has anyone been on the SCB, is it?  The fast one?
[all talking]: 
Gareth: Haven’t done that one.
Dick: Canada is another marvellous place to travel by train.  It’s so enormous.  I suppose america is but they don’t seem to use their trains much in America for some strange reason.
Moderator: Ah that depends I think. Some destinations are relatively unused. I once took the train between New York and Washington. And it’s a relatively good one.
Lotty: A very impressive one in Mexico is the Copper Canyon railway in northern Mexico.  
Dick: As long as you are not in a hurry.
Lotty: And that is a first class train as well, you know. Alt the carriages are all beautiful  and the service on board is very good.
Thomas: A few years ago I went to Bamph in Canada in the winter and the bus services were so frequent just because it got so cold it was like averaging when I was there about -35 so it was quite cold.  But they were just so frequent like …..
Emily: Because you couldn’t stand outside…?
Thomas: Yeah.  Didn’t want everyone to freeze waiting for a bus,.  Same in Frankfurt actually.  Just sort of so ….sort of bit of a shock realty.  Because you know sometimes you can sort of wait around just somewhere random or just sort of be like a bad luck…
Tamsin: They’ve got that texting service now haven’t they?  For catching buses. You send a text a number and they tell you when the next bus is coming.
Lotty: Well they’ve got that here.
Tamsin: Yes I think that’s brilliant.
Thomas: I never really understood it. I just like…oh ok.  
Lotty: Just wait?
Tamsin: I was just going to say as well, I haven’t actually a coach since high school or college and I think  a lot of school parties, and I haven’t been on one of those since high school.  I don’t know  there’s something about them that makes me think of long distance trips to Poland or Germany or something that you just….
Jean: The National Express is quite good. It’s more like a spaceship than a coach.
Emily: It always amazes me in this country that when you get bad weather the whole systems stops. But when you are aboard, Austria and that, they have so much snow out there but the buses still carry on, the trains still carry on, but over here everything just comes to a stop.
Gareth: People are getting to a panic aren’t they?
Emily: Yes. But when we talk about public transport abroad, in Malta the buses are something to be desired. Have you ever been top Malta?
Lotty: No.
Emily: They are the really old fashioned buses.  But you have to go on them .  The seats wobble, you don’t feel safe in there.
Lotty: It’s an experience?
Emily: It is.  Its part of being in Malta.
Thomas: In Bamph, because it’s like a national park, for the roads they can’t put salt down in case it entices the animals and then lots of road kill.  So they have to use grit and stuff and like all the buses and taxis have like massive sort of cracks all over the windscreen and i was like why don’t they just claim it on their insurance but they said that it happens so often if you did your insurance would just sort of rocket through the roof.  It was interesting how they just sort of put up with it.
Moderator: Chris, how do you travel?
Chris: Aborad?
Moderator: Where do you travel?  Two which places?
Chris: Generally if I am going abroad it is usually by airplane.  And then again when I am there I use public transport.  But I suppose if it was….I’ve got family in Ireland so whenever we go to Ireland we catch the ferry. Which is quite a nice way to travel really, because its kind of part of the holiday on the ferry and things like that.
[unknown]: The seas pretty rough.
Chris: Yeah it is a little bit rough, but it’s ok.  And then on the way back we usually get the quick ferry – the catamaran.  But if I’m in britain it’s usually car because a lot of the times although trains can be cheap they can also be really, really expensive as well. For what’s it worth. So I kind of tend to drive.  But for me its extra expense because whenever I want to go back to Wales I have to pay to go across the Severn Bridge which is £5.30, which is just so expensive sometimes it is worth getting the train back.
Moderator: Just one last question regarding that topic. Do you think your holiday changed within the last couple of years or did it change in general.  What do you think?
Thomas: I think for me, we’ve …my family started going to France because of the Plymouth Roscoff ferry. It’s quite convenient and i was taking GCSE French so I think my parents were quite keen to….
[all laughing]: 
Dick: Good excuse
Thomas: …. Experience.  But yeah I think that definitely…just because its so practical you can just sort of say lets go, you don’t have to plan it so much and sit in a car for 8 hours or something.  I’d say that as we become more aware of the sort of the practicalities of things you start to realise that it’s not quite as sort of scary as you might think.  Because you know, sometimes you go on holiday and just like packing you just want to end your life.
Moderator: Yes.  I see what you mean.  Dick, you mentioned something that you had to travel a little bit less for holiday?
Dick: Well yes my wife’s had two operations in the last 3 years.
Lotty: No 2 years I’ve had 3 operations.  So it’s limited on travel at the moment.
Moderator: Did it go well the operations?
Lotty: Well the last one I’m not sure.
Dick: It was a repeat of the first one which didn’t go well.
Moderator: Ah I see, that tells you something.
Dick: So she’s been in a great deal of discomfort over the last 2 years or so.  So its been a big difficult 
Lotty: Anyway we don’t’ want to talk about my operations.
Moderator: No, not in detail.
Dick: No.  So you can see that’s one reason why we’ve changed that.
Lotty: Yeah that’s changed our travel.
Dick: And I suppose our age is also affecting us of course. But you… I don’t know.  I now… if it’s more than an hours drive, I won’t do it,.  Because i find I get too tired and what’s the point, you get the other end and you are too tired so it’s not worth it so…  I mean we did have to drive to London a short while ago because, again, flooding on the rail.  Just outside bath somewhere so the trains weren’t going so I had to drive.  That was four hours and of course I am best part of a day before I am feeling really…that I want to do anything again, so it takes the shine off it.  I used to say don’t grow old.  My wife says what’s the option?
Gareth: I have a somewhat similar to you.  Many years ago when I started to drive, I had to drive everywhere.  I loved driving.  I’d even drive up to Ipswich for an interview and things like that. But as times gone on I’m finding now I prefer to be driven rather than drive. And I suppose you get more tired driving along time.  But certainly I would rather look around now.  And not be driving.  And again traffic.  Is another thing isn’t it?  I mean traffic is intensive now compared tow hat it was isn’t it?  I mean we used to drive down to France and if we saw a car in the distance you were lucky sort of thing but now its everywhere. This country is terrible.
Dick: Well I’m talking about my age.  And I am raised in rural Gloucestershire and if we saw two cars a week in our village that was ab out it you know.  And all the boys… I couldn’t…. but a lot of the boys could tell the car that was coming by the sound of the engine.  That kind of thing, you know. These days, two cars if you are lucky , you get two cars in 10 minutes you’re doing good these days aren’t you?  You were talking about how it’s changed. Most of these young people won’t realise what it was like not to have cars.
Gareth: No that’s right.  And the intensity….
Dick: I don’t know how old you were…I was about 30 before we had our first car.  Look at the shock and horror on their faces.  You’re ancient when you are 30.
Gareth: I did a lot of driving when I was working in the beginning.  Travelling all over devon and Cornwall and such like, Somerset.
Moderator: Thanks a lot.
Dick: When i came ashore I was working for a firm and I was driving all over London.  I wouldn’t even think of driving in London now.  All we had then was taxis carving you up.  These days everyone carves you up in London.
Gareth: I hope we are giving you some useful information you know.
Moderator: Definitely
Dick: It’s all going on this thing.
Lotty: You’ll have to ask questions that you want answers to.
Dick: He’s being very good at it actually.
Moderator: You know one of the main reasons for this mixed group is that you have some interaction and then that’s also [47.26] this.  It’s really helpful for us.  Be sure of that.
Dick: Excuse me asking. How long is this project been going on that you’ve been doing research for?
Moderator: It’s a two year project.  So we started at the beginning of the year.  And I came to Exeter and now I am here just for the project.  I’m a researcher here and my only thing to do is project work. 
Dick: So the petrol business is making your work rather interesting at the moment I should think.
Moderator: Yes, definitely it’s an interesting side aspect and we have a good time period for our project you know, because it changes so many things.  By the way, changes.  David, do you think your holiday travel changed over the last years?
David: Probably not massively.  I guess like, well, last summer I went across to Europe and rather than  sort of trying to fly everywhere we just got the ferry and drove up…we were only going to Holland anyway.  I guess maybe becoming more aware about sort of… about the problems with flying, all the different sort of environmental side effects you get with that.  I guess I sort of don’t want to fly as much, but if its something seriously long haul flying, like transatlantic or to asia then obviously you don’t have much option. But I think for shorter journeys I guess you should…well driving is not the ideal option , but the train or the tunnel is pretty hand especially from Kent where I am from.  We are about half hour away from Folkestone. It’s a pretty good option.
Dick: Can I ask has anybody been through the tunnel?
[all]: Yes.
Dick: We have yes. It’s a nice experience I think yes.  
Lotty: You are not supposed to be asking the questions.
Dick: Oh I’m sorry.
Moderator: No, that’s perfectly fine.  I used both modes of transport in the summer.
Dick: If you have a look at my fee you will see what my problem is.
Moderator: No, it’s not a problem really. It’s really ok I have to say.  Ok go ahead Jean.
Jean: When we go abroad my mum is scared of flying so we have to drive everywhere and we spend days in the car.  And that’s why I am quite used to going under the tunnel.
Lotty: It’s a horrible thing to have.  I used to have problem with flying.
Jean: I don’t like it that much but if I have to I will.  Because if I am going on holiday with friends.
Thomas: Isn’t it more dangerous driving though?
David: Yes statistically it’s more dangerous.
Jean: Yes but it’s a psychological thing.
Dick: It is.
Moderator: You are probably right yes.
Emily: You say about the tunnel but I don’t like the tunnel because I’m claustrophobic.
Gareth: My wife’s the same.
Emily: ….. And it really is…. For 25 minutes it’s a horrible thing to have to go through.
Dick: You are aware are you of the tunnel?
Emily: Yeah.
Dick: I don’t remember being aware of the tunnel you know except when….
Lotty: But that’s because you haven’t got a problem with confined spaces
Emily: [51.00] couldn’t actually see under the sea!
: [all laughing]
Dick: You see our friend here – she would have been quite happy going through the tunnel if she could she all the fishes going around…
Moderator: I’m not sure!
Lotty : That would be even worse.  I would prefer the tunnel I think.
Emily: It’s just that shut in space. But I don’t mind flying.  Because I can look out  a window and I suppose you see space.  It’s just that confined space being shut in. like in a lift.  I don’t like going in lifts.
Moderator: So this limits you a little bit I think.
Gareth: Did you find a problem in the beginning when you were on an aircraft?
Emily: No because I really like flying. I’d fly to work everyday if I could!
Gareth: My wife’s the same as you.  She won’t go in a tunnel and won’t go underground either. She won’t do that for the same reason as you.
Emily: My son lived in London for quite a few years and it was Ok going on the underground with him because he knew that …right go down there mum , get on, 5 minutes, 10 minutes you’re up and you’re out.  But if it was me and my husband and we were not quite sure , it took longer and I wouldn’t do it, so I always did the buses.  But for convenience.
David: I don’t like the underground either.  I hate it in the summer especially because it’s so hot.  It’s horrible down there.
Emily: So many people packed in I just…..
Thomas: Exciting really
Moderator: Different views I would say.
Tamsin: I think if you are used to it then its not a big fear, but when you are not used to it its really [52.47]
Emily: It’s if you know where you are going, that the big thing.  Like with Simon I didn’t mind because it was a quick get in, get on and you were OK but it’s just that…. But we are all different.
Dick: I think probably when the… if you are on the tube and it was absolutely packed you probably wouldn’t have that feeling because all you would be conscious of would be all the people that were squashing up against you.
Emily: Oh  I didn’t like that either!
Lotty: That’s worse. That’s worse when there is lots of people.
Emily: I like my space a little bit.
Moderator: Ok,.  Thanks a lot.  That brings us to another issue.  David mentioned something and I would just like to ask the general question. We sometimes use the term ‘sustainable travel’.  What do you think is sustainable travel, or what is it for you?
Tamsin: What does sustainable travel mean?
: [all laughing]
Lotty: I suppose walking.
Moderator: That’s my question.  OK.
Dick: Walking is about the only really sustainable travel. 
Moderator: Can you explain why?
Dick: I was talking about how life has changed so much from when I was a child to what it is here.  We can’t gon can we?  Having more cars and more.  I mean now you’ve only got to look at… [54.07] closed.  The whole town is chaos.  They’re getting a bit sorted out now, but you can understand and… I  know we are not like America with 2 or 3 cars per house but there is an awful lot of houses in this country that have 2 cars. 
Tamsin: We’ve got 4.
[all]: We’ve got 4.
Dick: You see? You see what I am getting at.  Are they normally all used at once?
[girls]: Yeah.
Jean: Each belong to different…well student house, we’ve got 4 …6 bed house, 4 or us have a got a car. At home home, a family of 5 and 4 of us have got cars.
Dick: We were talking about sustainability, you just look ahead you soon will take you 10 minutes to drive from the Union road to here because there will be so many cars.  Coming down there was cars – you had to stop for this and they are parked her and they are parked there, there is somebody else unloading something there and you get held up.  I mean…. You’ve only got to look at the car travel when the university is….when you are all coming in and the morning or going out at night.  We are very careful about which road we take.
Tamsin: Absolutely
Dick: When its university movement time.  And I can see that in another 10 maybe 15 year’s the whole of this country is going to be like that.
Lotty: And it’s not going to be sustainable because there won’t be… you know, oil is going to run out.  There will have to be an alternative. So walking or cycling is probably the most sustainable.
Thomas: Something I learned recently which I found interesting – Greenpeace, unless I am just sort of making this up and it has somehow just entered my mind, but I am sure that I heard somewhere that Greenpeace are completely against bio fuel because of the cash crops and it forcing all these farmers to have the really bad rates and jot using it for food and things.  And I thought that was really surprising because the sort of idea of bio fuels is sort of like more carbon efficient and all this sort of stuff and its just seems…I thought it was quite interesting really because … lots of people were sort of saying the new sort of step on weren’t they?  Oh we can all use bio fuels because the oil is running out.  But then you sort of think well….
Tamsin: Ethically?
Thomas: Yeah. There is such an ethical problem surely that’s not going to happen so you Are sort of thinking what are we left with?  Hydrogen [57.01].  That’s really hard to do .  Like extract hydrogen from things.  So it’s interesting isn’t it.  There’s something big is going to happen in the next…..
Dick: [57.13] the rest of our lifetime but I suspect some of you here will be … might recall this conversation you know. Because it’s…I don’t know – you may know.  What…how many more cars are there in Britain now then there were 10 years ago?  Do you know what the percentage increase is?  I would think it is probably 20%.
Moderator: Could be yeah. One of the main problems is that if you see cars it is often only occupied by one person.
Dick: Oh it’s a very inefficient way of travelling.
Moderator : And just to give you a  short explanation. Sustainability is about mainly environmentally modes of transport but also some social and other economic aspects.  It’s all together linked and the main issue for sustainable travel is to keep the world ongoing so they are saying to keep it for forthcoming generations.  So you can only use environmentally friendly as a substitute but in general terms sustainable travel is pretty much linked to that but a little bit more.
Lotty: Of course.  If you are travelling on a train pr bus or something then that fuel is transporting a lot more people then these hundreds of cars that are taking the same journey with just one or two in the car, you know from here to London and comparing it from here to London on the train , all those people travelling, you know.  What percentage is required in a train to what the same number of people travelling up, one or two people in a car, what is the difference.  I mean I don’t know if anybody has done that sort of research.
Jean: With regard to cars it’s more than just getting from A to B. it is about the car as a commodity.  So until you change people’s attitudes about thinking about what kind of lifestyle they want to lead there is no hope in anything green.
Gareth: But there are many occasions surely when you don’t just travel from A to B. you’ve got to go to C, D and E on the way for some reason or other and a train is no good at all then is it?
Dick: No, of course.  There is no option to it really.
Gareth: It depends on what you need to do.
Dick: But the question was about sustainability.
Gareth: Oh yes.
Dick: What you are suggesting is we should be thinking about what are we going to be like, what are we going to do in 10 or 15 years time.
Jean: Yes, it’s more about changing our mindsets rather than actually providing it.  Because you could if you wanted it.
Dick: The car is the most convenient thing you could think of.  It really is convenient.  If you really started working out the cost f it you would probably be staggered.  The depreciation and everything else.  And of course it’s not just the cost of the fuel that is going up at a frantic rate anyway. I was only reading something in the Financial Times the other day that they really don’t think it will ever go back below a $100 a barrel and it’s about $130 now at the moment.  I think 12 months ago it was 75 or something like that.
Emily: And also the size of vehicles will come into this.  You know there is a lot of people they want another 4x4s.  But now you get a lot of the Smart cars and things like that around.  I think that will be a big part of our future. The size of the vehicles.
Thomas: It’s get me quite angry when you see one person driving a massive 4x4s and they are not even like proper ones, they are just show ones!  But you know you can get ones like for farming and things like that and you can understand why farmers would have one practically.  
Lotty: And it looks like a farmer vehicle.
Thomas: And I can sort of believe them and go OK.  But these like big…. It just frustrates.
Dick: Yes.  And they were…well we’re going off the subject aren’t we?
Moderator: No. Definitely not.
Dick: I believe the government is suggesting that there is going to be some kind of extra tax , a yearly tax if you have a certain size vehicle.  I meanthe3 point is this that general speaking most people who own and rive those vehicles can afford them and the extra £400 a year is neither here or there. I did come up with an idea that maybe what they should do is put an extra tax on the sale of it.  So in other words, say there was when you went to buy this kind of vehicle you had to pay £5000 extra regardless of its age.  Now that would mean when you bought a new one you’d pay £5000.  when you came to sell it the agent is going to give you £5000 less than he thinks that he would today because he knows that when he sells it to the next person they’ve go to pay £5000 more. And so it will go on.  You talk about farmers. I can appreciate why some farmers need these vehicles and of course some people…workmen and that kind of thing need them.  But to me if they should have all these heavy vehicles…and unless there was all the seating was the 3 people who cold sit in the front including the driver. And there is  lot of….. Like the old Landrovers you just sat 3 people in the front and that was it.  The rest of it was just taken up with the sheep and whatever you happened to be carting around.  I would have thought that those kind of vehicles should be exempt. But anyone who is taking…. I mean there was somebody on the television a short while ago – he was saying he’d got to have…he’s a farmer, he’s got to have …… and he’d got this great big land rover that seated 8 people or something like that.  And I thought just a minute…when i grew up we still had steam traction engines in the village.  No, its…. I know you’ve got to go around  lot faster these days.  But quite frankly for a farmer to try to convince himself that hee needs a vehicle that can seat about 6 people, I don’t know.  Unless he’s got a very large family of course.
Thomas: It seems in society at the moment the idea of sort of stepping back and just staying where you are is completely out of the question.  Everything is new and throw away society.  New technology, new this, new that, upgrade.  I think you have to tackle this problem don’t you?  I think almost that’s more of a problem than the idea of trying to work out new solutions for things.
David: I think you have got to have new technology to try and overcome the problem as well. You can’t just carry on using the sort of engines that producing the sort of emissions that you’ve got today. I mean stuff like hybrids which are already…well I think are already reducing emission to an extent just because they a re sop much lower than every other sort of car.  And I think… you mentioned hydrogen fuel cells before, I think they are probably closer to doing something major with them then maybe a lot of people think, I reckon.  Relatively soon.
Thomas: I agree with you point that definitely like the development of technology makes thins cleaner and obviously that makes things better.  I still feel that quite a lot of development isn’t necessarily about what’s best for the planet.  It’s about fitting the coolest neon light under your hood or something.
Chris: Yeah.  Development for developments sake.
Thomas: Yeah.  It seems like here’s a bit of…. People can sort of say oh yeah it’s for this, when you advertise a new car, you couldn’t say oh well it’s got a little solar panel in the mirror somewhere.
Lotty: I am impressed that a 16 year old has that impression.  You know, that we are a throwaway society.  I am impressed.
Dick: Yes.  I k now you were talking about sustainability and we re talking about ravel really.  But I was just thinking we are talking about cars because we think of petrol, but that’s made of petrol isn’t it?  Plastic is made out of petrol.  This is made out of petrol.  Those are petrol.  We don’t just use petrol to produce car fuel.  The gas that comes out of these wells is a by-product of the petrol industry.  That’s going to run out as well.  Most electricity is produced with some kind of…. Very few of it is coal.  Most of it is a petrol based fuel of some sort.  So anyway.  I am glad I am 80!
Moderator: Thank you.  I am happy that this is partly good.
Dick: Oh yes, I didn’t point at yours did I.  That was very clever of me.
Moderator: Another general question.  What would be necessary top attract you in person to change your travel behaviour to lets say a more sustainable way. Can you think about something?
Thomas: Sorry I don’t understand.  Do you mean what would persuade us to use more sustainable transport?
Moderator: Yeah.  I mean if you think you already…. You maybe  already using sustainable transport but if you could think about maybe what you or other people would….. Make it more attractive for them to change their behaviour to a more sustainable way.  Like regarding to transport and travel.
Chris: To use cars a lot less I think, public transport should be a lot cheaper because it is just so expensive and people are just so discouraged from using public transport, especially in this country, it’s so infrequent, there are so many problems, so unreliable.  I think if it was slightly cheaper and a little bit more reliable people would be more inclined to leave their cars and take public transport.  Because even taxis are ridiculously expensive you know. So expensive.
Jean: This sounds really superficial but sometimes… I quite like cycling as well but I don’t cycle some nights because I don’t turn up somewhere really sweaty, really red.
Thomas: Like me.
Jean: I just feel calmer if I arrive by car.
Dick: [68.25]
Thomas: Security isn’t it?
David: … get stuck in a massive traffic jam, you’re just sat there [68.34]
Dick: You turn up sweaty anyway and stressed out.
Moderator: You mentioned security , Thomas
Thomas: Yes I was just saying as well in the car, sort of I know if I came back from a gig and I get picked up or something, not that that very often happens.  But if it does and if you are walking home, or on your bike or jump in a car, there’s especially sort of at night, there is a big thing about your car and like a part of you and being secure. I don’t know, it sort means a [69.07] doesn’t it?
Dick: Yes. You’re in this steel case and you think you are safe don’t you?
Jean: Because bikes are very vulnerable these days.
Dick: Yes.  But I don’t know if anybody has looked at the figures but there’s an awful lot about the number of people being killed in Afghanistan, but has anybody looked at the number of young people that have been killed in Cornwall in the last year, on the motorways, car, you know. Devon…. It may get a little bit in the local news, a little bit in the paper but nothing is every really mentioned about how dangerous cars are.  First of all they often kill the drive because he’s doing something silly or someone in the back has been shouting at him and he’s lost attention.  Dorry we are off the subject aren’t.  I’m on one of my hobby horses aren’t I?
Lotty: Yes.
Moderator: No, it’s really OK.
Dick: But you know…. Sustainability, I don’t know.
Moderator: There are some potential measures trying to force people to change there behavior but do you think about…lets mention road pricing or congestion charging.
David: I think carbon taxes…would possibly be a better way forward.
Moderator: Ok.  Yes go ahead Thomas.
Thomas: Its sort of do with the whole sort of carbon idea.  But I hav always had this sort of idea that if… there are certain energy corporations that just deal with renewable ways of producing energy like solar panels and wind turbines and things like that. And I always thought that if there was some kind of link between the government and these sort of energy producers and if you were part of this like energy corporation, like so you got your energy from these people, like you wouldn’t get so highly taxed and I thought we could use things like electric cars and stuff.  So if more people pushed for it. I just thought that as a concept it would a be  a nice idea and it would cut down on carbon and I suppose if it’s a lot cheaper, people might actually consider it, considering how much taxes go up and also the carbons.  But it’s not practical at all.
David: I think that’s essentially what carbon taxing is.  You price stuff like coal fired power stations or gas powered power stations so much higher that everyone would choose a more sustainable like, wind power or HEP or whatever.  That’s sort of what I understood….well, also obviously fuel prices is going to have increase significantly.
Moderator: Yes.  So Chris?
Chris: Even if fuel prices do keep increasing, people will still pay that.  They’ll be reluctant but they will still pay it just because of convenience and through pure habit because somebody is not going to all of a sudden start using a train or you know looking at electric cars or whatever just because the fuel prices are going up, if its kind of the business man who needs to commute every single day, they are just not going to do it, because its afforce of habit and its much more convenient to just use a car and pay the extra in the petrol.
Thomas: It’s a good point.
Tamsin: I wanted to look into…. You know the websites where you can share cars?  I wanted to look at that.  Especially just before… because I was in between cars in my second year. And especially doing the weekly shop, it was a pain trying to sort that out.  My panniers can only hold so much on my bike.  But it’s actually quite difficult to get into because you have to fit yourself into this timetable and then you are having to depend on other people as well to be on  time and to drop the cars off. and I had a go once and this woman was half an hour late and I missed the thing I wanted to go to, so I thought right sod it, much easier if I go in my own car.  Then I can only responsible for myself.  Which is a purely selfish way of thinking about it.  But realistically, that’s the way that you are.  I always offer lifts and share the petrol price and everything just so that people don’t take multiple cars. And that takes a bit or organising and a bit of extra legwork but that’s absolutely fine.
Dick: It’s interesting, the point you were talking about – we have got solar heating on hand.  There is always a lot of people talk – well I can’t see how I would get my money back.  In actual fact I looked at it the other way around because I like figures alright, and I reckon that my solar hearting is earning me about 10% return on the capital.  And quite frankly, I don’t know how you are all off for money, but 10% return is a pretty good return.  And…so our electricity…I’ve actually checked my electricity and gas bill for the 6 months ….the previous 6 months…07 and 08 and I am 17% down on my costs.
Thomas: Which is because you have solar panels?
Dick: That’s part of it of course.  We are also more conscious because it is all going up so much. So as it is going up as much and I am stills having, I don’t know, I am probably doing better than 10%.  I’m probably doing 20, I don’t know.  But we heat….it’s very efficient, its heats my water.  I’ve even got a special little solar so it drives the pump that circulates it.  So alright it’s a capital outlay but then of course lots of people have got capital in their banks, and they are earning what 5% maybe.  If they get 6% they would think they were ding marvellously. And you could do something like this and you get a better rerun and also it makes you feel good I might add too.
Moderator: So we are back to the prices again.  Economic costs?
Dick: Oh yes.  Well that was part of my job, so I am interested in what I get in return.  To me that’s much more important.  In other words it’s not how much it cost, bt how much is it worth to me.  We were talking about cars a minute ago.  And you were talking about the inconvenience of sharing with somebody so what you are saving by sharing wasn’t worth the cost of having to wait half an hour for somebody and missing a meeting, you see. So in actual fact, if you start thinking about your lives, an awful lot of it is do with what does it cost and what do I benefit…what is my benefit to me. You drive a car most of the time.  It costs you, but as far as you are concerned the convenience, the cost is a good return because of the convenience. And possibly the time you save.  I don’t know how important your time is to you. I mean I am retired now, so my time is not terribly important to me.  But I mean the majority of people in life, time is important and is valuable and you just can’t afford…. You talked about having to take 3 buses.  Well alright if you left home an hour earlier in the morning and going home an hour later every night, you could save some money, but the cost to you of those two hours is not worth the cost compared to running a car.
Emily: There’s the saying – time is money.
Dick: Yes.  It is.  And you do tend to forget this.  The cost of everything.  We are all sat around here.  There’s electricity going on, this is all costings.  It’s costing him to have us here.  
Lotty: Well not him personally.
Moderator: That’s the thing about who has to pay for that.
Dick: But I mean everything has got a cost to it.  And we do tend to overlook that point.  We talk about convenience and convenience is a cost whether you like it or not.
Emily: But then that depends on what age scale you are at.  You know, obviously when you are younger, time is more important to you.  But when you get older and you retired, it doesn’t really matter so much.
Dick: You’d be surprised. You should see my garden.
Lotty: You can take other options because you are not so pressed for time.
Emily: Yes.  But when you are younger and you are living to a schedule….
Tamsin: I’d much rather have the extra hour in bed then get up an hour earlier and get the bus.
Dick: Yeah.  I might join you on that.  I was a newsagent and I still didn’t like getting up early.
Moderator: Just one lest point regarding sustainable travel.  Do you think holiday travel should be included too and it would be possible to force people to change their holiday or their number of flights or destination?  What do you think?
[all]: No, I don’t…..
David: I think carbon offsetting could be made a lot easier.
Moderator: Carbon offsetting?  Do you use that?
David: Well I’ve never really….because the only holidays that I’ve been on sort of recently have been big group ones and I’ve had pretty limited participation in organising it, but I don’t know, I think it’s probably something that I’d look into.  But I know that …well, I know BA do quite an easy carbon offsetting thing. 
Tamsin: What do you mean by carbon offsetting, sorry? Avoiding it?
David: No, no.  You can pay extra to offset the carbon that you are in theory using making your flight.  I think that’s…..
Dick: Yes that’s right
Lotty: So they plant more trees.
Thomas: Sorry I don’t understand.
Dick: You can sell…. You can sell you….. Say I believe on certain things, you can sell it to somebody else who needs them because they want extra than they are allowed and so yes.
Lotty: But that doesn’t seem right to me because somebody is still using it. It’s not being reduced, if someone buys your…..
Dick: Well let’s put it this way…if the whole thing is reduced by say 10% and if you can reduce yours by 20% and sell the 10% spare to the person, the whole thing is still 10% less.
Emily: Can you just break that down a bit because you’ve lost me completely.
Moderator: About carbon offsetting?  I can try to explain, yes. Some airlines offer for you to ad a certain amount of money to your paid price that you paid for your ticket.  With this extra money they go to another company and they make up for your carbon, what’s produced during your flight. If you go from A to B, there is a certain amount of carbon dioxide blown into the air and then there are other companies who for instance plant some trees.  They calculate how much they need to do these other measures to compensate the carbon that you produced with your flight.  And that’s the idea.  So many people aren’t aware of that I think.  Ok.  I have to come back to Tamsin.  You said that you don’t think that it’s possible to include holiday travel to sustainability measures?
Tamsin: I saw it as purely limiting people’s freedom of choice as to what destination and what they want to do. That’s what I thought it was.  I think if something is proven to be as efficient as what we’ve already got regardless of economical land, environmental bit, I think people would be more inclined to choose that. But I think realistically in this day and age people will not want to be told what to do.  They would want to be shown this works and have word of mouth or something to prove to them that it does work before they actually give it a go.  And I think my interpretation of your question was that…. Limit people by… for where they want to travel and I don’t think  you can do that.
Moderator: Chris you agreed with that?
Chris: Yes.  I think it’s another thing with convenience and force of habit. Again, people are so used to being able to hop on a plane to go somewhere abroad or just take the train or the boat and I just don’t think people are willing to change that.  No matter how much you kind of say, well the planet is suffering and all things like..  because there are so many adverts on TV now all about energy saving even from kind of your washing powder and things like that, they are advertising for energy saving but I really don’t think are that inclined to want to change their ways. I think everybody is stuck in a force of habit and convenience.
Jean: I think people do want to change but I think sometimes it’s got to be given to them on a  plate in order to choose it.
David: I think they are going to have to be forced into making the change by pricing everything else out of the market.
Dick: I would suggest that the cost of petrol at the moment is forcing a lot of us to rethink things.  I actually rang the AA up just before I came out just to confirm this, because I had heard some years ago that if you drive your car at 5 miles an hour slower than you normally do, you will save 10% of your fuel costs.
Chris: Is that if you drive in a higher gear everywhere.
Dick: No.  But, they actually did mention the fact that it is apparently humps increase the cost of your fuel, increase the amount of fuel you use because you are slowing up and accelerating.  But this is a fact, alright. So in other words…. People are changing you know.  Admittedly I would suggest that we’re not a real sample of what the world is like out there, people outside because first of all we are prepared to come here and talk about these things.  And most people are not really worried.  You’ve only got to look at the person who accelerates fast off the traffic light an that kind of thing to realise he’s not at all conscious of what its costing him in fuel, is he?  Or her.  I say him, because it’s probably a man mostly.  I know some of the ladies are getting a bit stroppy these days in cars I’ve noticed.
Lotty: They’re getting uppity he means, you know, young women.
Gareth: But the [84.00] sings are all incorrect now.  We look at the number of traffic lights there are.  Every time you stop now you are producing more pollution.  Roads from two lanes down to one, so you’re stacking it up now, now you’ve got to accelerate twice instead of once.  And its bad design isn’t it, all the way through.
Dick: Yes quite.
Gareth: And if you talk about the amount of carbon.  Fine.  Britain is charging for this and charging for that.  What about China?  India?  America?  Look at the stuff they are putting gout.  They’re not….what percentage is Britain contributing to the carbon content in the world?  Not such a lot when you start looking at it.  So alright, we’re saving something.  I’m not against saving something, but it’s miniscule compared with what’s being pushed out in other places.  We’re not really getting the benefit of what we are doing.
David: I think it’s difficult though because with China and India….
Chris: They ar a lot bigger.
David: Well no.  Also they are developing quite rapidly now, and we’ve gone through the development stage a couple of hundred years ago, we’ve gone through the massive emissions of sort of your coal, oil whatever.  I think it’s a bit unfair to compare us to India and China just because….. Obviously they’re also making quite heavy investment into reducing emissions. I just….. It’s difficult to say….is it a free rider?  Is that the right term/ the free rider?
Dick: Actually you’ve got a very good point here because…. Let us say that China 50 years ago was producing an half of 1 % of the world’s production and now they are producing 25%. So that looks enormous. But America is still the biggest producer of everything in the world still.  But it’s just because China and Japan have expanded so fast and shall we say………….they’re foreigners.  So you see it’s very easy for us to be critical for what they are doing.  But you’ve got a very good point there, is the fact is that they are just catching up or trying to. I can foresee that in 10 years America will not be the biggest producer, biggest manufacturer in the world as it is now. I mean Ford cars has practically gone bust anyway. They are having to sell everything off right and centre.  General Motors is in a terrible state, although they’ve got production all over the world. But it’s  …… I don’t know.  I feel the whole world is being controlled by the dollar and that is what is slipping,.  People are starting to realise that there’s other things in the world that are important.  Whether it will get there or not, I don’t think it will get there in my lifetime.  I don’t think I’ve got that many years left.  But you young people I think…… in 25 years time will be very surprised at what this world is going to be like then.
David: I think as well. You mentioned America [87.25] 80% emissions cuts.  Even McCain is promising 65…..
Dick: But he is a politician and he’s trying to win votes isn’t he.
David: Well yeah but……
Dick: I’m sorry if anybody is taking politics here but…..you know.
David: I know what you mean.  But I think…compared to Bush especially there is…. Moving in the right direction.
Chris: Its worth seeing how [87.45]
Lotty: But even McCain I read this morning is now going along with the sort of ….exploring around their coast like Alaska. He’s now changed saying because of all the petrol prices, so it’s all sort of politics.  But you are right about what India and China are churning out now.  It’s the same as in Victorian times.  With all the factories and coal fires going.
Dick: It wasn’t called the Black Country for no reason at all.
Lotty: It was the black country.
Moderator: Sorry to interrupt.
Dick: We’re getting rather serious.
Moderator: No that’s not the problem. I’m looking at my watch and we are running a little bit out of time and maybe if something [88.42].  one last question for you before…. And that is your behaviour at home, at your house.  What do you think you could do to behave sustainable or environmentally friendly at home. Could you think of something?
Thomas: At my dad’s house we don’t get any electricity off the grid. We have our own solar panels and a wind turbine and get all our hot water from solar panels on our roof and stuff. And we use a generator which runs off used vegetable oil. So in effect that means its carbon neutral I think because if it was out put in a landfill it would still emit the carbon just slower.  I hope I am making sense. So I like to think it’s because we are so conscientious of the climate but I think that my dad does it more for economic …. So….bit of a mechanic so he can just sort of….
Lotty: No. You’re misjudging him a bit I think.
Dick: Well no of course we all like extra money don’t we?
Thomas: Yes.  I think I am sort of quite excited about it because its sort of makes you feel like you are doing something a bit different and then I think he is sort of quite excited because he doesn’t to have to worry so much about the mortgage or something.
Lotty: Well it’s more of a challenge isn’t it?
Moderator: Anything else? Not everybody has their generator I guess?
Lotty: Electric light bulbs.  We’ve done…low energy. Changed those around.
Emily: Energy saving bulbs.
Jean: Your own plastic bags back to supermarket.  [90.28] switch it off
Tamsin: I remember when I used to go to Tesco and we just to load it straight back into the trolley and people were like oh what on earth are they doing?  Are they trying to shoplift. And then these big I am not a plastic bags came in.  And they were like ah not using plastic bags.  But we get in fresher week, there was this ….Devon’s equivalent of the water board, Exeter water board.
Dick: South West Water
Tamsin: That’s it. They had these plastic things that go in the loo in the cistern. We thought they were brilliant ….
Dick: Hippos in the cistern.
Tamsin: Yeah because that’s saves a couple of litres of water. But we’ve got outback we’ve gone a bit eco mad and got the whole recycling ordered thing and compost [91.11]
Lotty: Well we’ve got a wormery.  And also….
Dick: And we save our rainwater to water….. Despite the fact that the plants prefer rainwater to tap water anyway, so we get a two way benefit that way. And we ar on ammeter of course.  I expect everybody in this room is on a meter at home are they? No?
Tamsin: A meter is where you put money in it or…?
Moderator: No just to see how much you use.
Dick: The normal water system in this country is to be charged on the rateable value of your hous.  
Emily: That’s what ours is.
Dick: But if you’ve got a meter you only pay for what you use. If you’ve got 5 or 6 children then it’s a bit more expensive.
Tamsin: I don’t know if I speak for all students but we haven’t got to that stage where we can decide whether we are on meters or not, whereas we just get what we are given in student accommodation.  But I think that’s definiltey..We’re building a bank of things to be more economical friendly on saving stuff.
Moderator: In general do you think it’s necessary to do these things these days?
Lotty: I think we should we should all try.
Dick: Necessary is the wrong word. I think necessary is the wrong word.  I think it’s worthwhile to do it, right?  Financially and shall we say for our consciousness.
Lotty: Feel good factor.
Dick: Feel good factor yes. No?
Moderator: Fell good factor?  Interesting.  Anybody else?
Dick: Excuse me which part of the world are you from?
Moderator: Germany
Dick: Don’t you have a word like or a statement like feel good factor in German?
Moderator: No we haven’t. Maybe use to feel good too.  You know.
Dick: I see.  I didn’t think it was purely the English who had these funny ideas.
Moderator: I was just wondering if it is really an issue.  Feeling?  Yes maybe it is really about feeling better.
: [general agreement]
Emily: It may not be a big thing but it is a small contribution.
Lotty: That’s right yes.
Emily: If people do small contributions then it’s got to be good.
Lotty: Yes.  And if everybody does we should re-educate most of the Americans for  a start.
Moderator: Yeah maybe that’s one thing.
Tamsin: It’s even becoming slightly cool to be a bit eco friendly, like I am not a plastic bag, everyone…..
Jean: And charity shops.
Lotty: Well it’s all recycling isn’t it.
Dick: We take things to the charity shop, I’ve brought some more recycling.  My wife will be in shortly to take something out.
Moderator: Ok, thank you very much.  One last thing I want to ask you…….