Name of speaker: Transcription
Moderator: Welcome to you. Thank you very much for being here.  Your contribution is very much appreciated.  My name is Moderator.  I am a researched from Exeter University. I am working at the Department of Geography and we are having a 2 year project regarding travel behaviour – how people travel from one place to another, what mode of transport they use.  The meeting won’t probably last 90 minutes if it’s only the 3 or us or the 4 of us.  Anyway it could be interesting for you too because I experienced that it’s always also interesting for the participants in some way. It will be a really relaxed discussion, we just ask you to let one person at a time speak, because we have to record it. Hopefully it’s ok for you. It is in no way related to your names or your address, so we have some data protection rules, you don’t have to be concerned about that.  The first thing I want to ask you is just to introduce yourself.  It’s ok to only use your first name…
Simon: I am Simon, I’m in my mid twenties.  I am a student still and I live in Princeton.
Moderator: What’s your first name?
Simon: Simon.
Jessica: I’m Jessica and I’m 70 years of age, retired of course.  I’ve lived in Crediton for 62 years.  I retired and I’ve sort of got time to get around a bit now and I use transport more than I ever did before.
Moderator: Ok. thanks
Thomas: Yeah I’m Thomas.  I’m 40 and I am a self employed engineer and I live in [1.57]
Moderator: Thank you very much.  The first thing I want to ask you just briefly to fill out these things. Is that ok for you?  Do you need anything?  It’s really….. don’t think too much about it, it’s just to have a start and I will ask you about these things later. It’s about certain travel purposes and your normally used means of transport and if there is an alternative and if there is not just leave it out.
: [all writing]
Moderator: My first question to you is obviously which modes of transport you usually use and are there major differences in the way you travel for different purposes.  You just wrote it down.  Let’s maybe start with Simon?
Simon: Yes.  For larger journeys within the Uk I usually take the National Express to visit family or to go to London.  And go between where I study in Cambridge and here I take the National Express.  However once or twice a year I need to move my personal possessions and then I use my personal car.  I do less then 2000 miles a year although previously I was doing between 5000 and 10000 miles a year.  This has cut down a big amount.
Moderator: When did it change and why maybe?
Simon: It changed when I stopped studying in the Southwest and started studying further away. Also it changed when I was studying part time to full time.  I used the car a lot more when I studied part time.  Now I am full time and I have accommodation.  I try not to use my car unless I move my possessions which happens at the beginning and the end of the year.  Within Cambridge I walk a lot to my university, shopping.  If the walk is more than 35 or 40 minutes I will try to take the bus or if it’s raining I’ll try and take the bus.  Yes, I visit London, when I visit London I use the National Express also.  When I work – I work part time during the summer I walk if it’s possible.  And if say I am fortune to work part time in Crediton here, if I was working in Exeter I would probably also try and use the bus. It’s very convenient and it’s always been good for people of student age to use buses as frequently as possible I believe.  Shopping – is a difficult one.  I mean there is the internet now so when you order things they come by parcel and delivery.  I also work in retail so i notice a lot of delivery and parcel movement all the time. It’s hard to say how to sort of cut this down i think.  Packaging is always….its usually as light as possible and that’s the best way I guess. It’s hard to say really.  Personally I don’t tend to order a lot via the internet.  Well not a lot frequently. I think that things that tend to get bought nowadays, like my Grandpa – he buys a lot of presents for the little ones and they tend to come in lots of packaging and be big and bulky because they have toys that are interesting to play with and interactive. Going on holiday in the recent 6 or 7 years I’ve been trying to use less air planes. Originally I am from Hong Kong so 8000 or 13000 km away was a long plane ride, about 13 hours.  However I haven’t been there in the last 6 or 7 years. And instead the holidays have tended to be on boats or ships, preferably sailing direct form a port in the UK.  Because people don’t like having to get all their luggage onto a plane, fly somewhere, take all their luggage off and then have to feel like they are going into another mode of transport before they settle down. Although occasionally though i do make I would saying the last 10 years I have probably made very other year…. Almost every other year… I have made one short journey to somewhere in Europe for educational…study leave.  Usually a week or two weeks in different places in Europe. Going to art galleries actually.  They’ve been the short flights.  Although originally they used to leave just from London, in recent times there have been more of a frequency of taking the nearest airport.  I don’t know that that’s such a bad thing because you know airlines like Fly Be they use propeller which are supposed to use less fuel.  
Moderator: Ok i think we will come back to that later in another section.  Thanks that was a lot.  Jessica maybe has different view?
Jessica: Yeah.  Shopping – because of the health of my wife we take the car. Except I started using…with a free….. on a fixed income, a pension, we have to sort of watch how much we are spending, which of course with petrol going up.  I find that the free bus travel is a great bonus now.  And that’s what why we often go to Exeter on the bus for free.  Take the car for the big shops of course.  [10.26] we don’t much of that but when we usually walk. Trips to the countryside – now we go to the countryside a lot. No buses to where we want to go, we have to the car.  Or I walk.  If it’s not too far.  Work doesn’t apply of course.  Now going on holiday, now I prefer to go by train, but there again the cost of train tickets when you are on a fixed income is just too much so we take the car.  We feel guilty about it I must admit, and we are going to Cornwall tomorrow for a couple of days by car.  Now I’ve got a free ticket I could get on the bus and go tot Exeter and get another bus to Plymouth and another bus to St Austell and another bus to where I am going all for free.  But the time, it would take so long. But it is useful for going to Exeter and places like that i must admit.
Moderator: But for these longer journeys it’s not only the prices, it’s also the convenience?
Jessica: No the time and my wife’s health basically.  Train is what I prefer. I’ve always been a great fan of trains.  I want to say something about that.  So I [11.45]
Moderator: Could be.
Jessica: I do think Britain should modernise the railways and do something to keep train fares so they are affordable.  
Moderator: Ok thanks.  I think we will come back to that.  Thomas?  What is it for you?
Thomas: Yeah.  Car features predominantly on here really.  But for shopping I think now living in Crediton we are fairly central and the majority of the shopping is walking.  If we go to the supermarket maybe once every two or three weeks and do one big shop we’ll drive, but the day to day stuff we just walk into town or to the supermarket, which is just…. [12.34] the convenience of being close by. And it’s good for the kids as well, because I can hoof them out the house and let them go.  The alternative I suppose is the car.  And we do a lot of shopping on line as mentioned.  For leisure it’s nearly always the car.  Occasionally we’ll take the train into Exeter, but it will all depend whether the times suit you know with what we want to be doing.  And again for trips out it comes down to car.  Again for convenience.  Occasionally we’ll use a train if we are going down to the coast or Exmouth but again it tends to be around… making it suit times we want [13.09] suiting your day.  For work i do a lot of driving.  It’s nearly all car.  Last year I did 46000 miles. This year I’ve done nothing like that.  
Moderator: It’s quite different from Simon
Thomas: Which I am not very pleased about it and as an alternative where possible if I was working in London i would take the train.  For working aborad - i do a lot of work in Ireland, I used to fly.  Would probably do 20 or 30 flights year.  Now I tend to always take the ferry.  I prefer the convenience of driving.  And also the ferry is an over night trip and i like the idea of sleeping and travelling at the same time.  It makes sense to me.  When I arrive there I have a full working day.  Holiday – really depends where we are going.  This year we went skiing in February, we flew down to the French Alps.  Normally we would if we were in this country we would drive.  I think that’s it really.
Moderator: Just one question for you.  Are there maybe things you …can do you explain what do you like about the means of transport you use. For you it’s mostly the car I think.  Are there maybe things you don’t like?
Thomas: Well I use the car out of convenience.  Personally I hate driving.  I derive no pleasure from having to use it.  It’s not too bad if I am working in the South West but if I have to go across to London or the Home Countries or where the traffic use is 5 times worse then it is here I hate doing it.  So there is no….it is just a matter of convenience to take the car, work requirements. Train actually would be my preferred.  
Moderator: So if you could you would use the train?
Thomas: Oh yes without a doubt.
Moderator: And you don’t use it?  Why?  What’s the main reason you can’t use it.  
Thomas: Its’ simple.  Its time.  I mean for example last year – I had to get the train to London, I drove down to Exeter to get the train at 6 o’clock. I got there, they said oh the 6 o’clock train is cancelled.  You’ll have to go on the 7 O’clock train.  And I look at my watch and that’s going to make me late.  So i come back out of the train station, get in my car and drive to London.  It’s that kind of issue.  If they kept a time and the times were suitable my preference would be…. I worked in Cambridge for 14 months and I used the train every Friday and Sunday to travel to and from.  And I loved it.  It’s a lovely way to travel.  But because the times suited me.
Moderator: Ok.  Jessica?  What do you like about the way you travel and maybe are there things you don’t like?
Jessica: Oh!  I wish I could travel by train more.  
Moderator: Oh you also?
Jessica: Yes.   Only today I went to the information bureau in Crediton to get one of these [16.13] tickets.  I don’t know if you know what they are. What is it Car…..Car net? Tickets.  [16.22] and Devon County Council brought in a scheme a couple of months ago where they issued  for £12.50 you could buy a book of tickets for 5 return journey. It was 10 tickets.  £1.25 each.  You could use 2 [16.49] and give it the inspector and go into Exeter and another one out when you come back.  And it was ideal for my son.  He goes into Exeter 3 times a week. He was using it every day.  A lot cheaper than the bus and today they were starting a new lot that expired on 30 June.  New lot starts Monday.  I was told they would be in today. I went up the office and they said oh they’ve stopped it.  They’ve stopped it.  No advance warning.  Because it was costing too much. Now my son has been counting the passengers at Crediton station at 7.50am and 18 or 20 are there every morning. Now before that all the times he’s gone down there to catch a train and these been 2.  And they say that it doesn’t pay.  They kept it for Yeovil, Cobblestone and Morton Bishop.  Put the price up to or I think it’s about £25 a week. [18.01]. but to my mind they want you to use the line, they want you to use… or get out of your cars.  And then they do this.  I’ve been on to a Councillor today. He didn’t need know anything about.  A county councillor – news to him.  He was disgusted.  So we’ll see what happens.
Moderator: Thank you.
Simon: I’d just like to add also I overheard about the train that goes from ST David’s down to Plymouth.  The rush hour train, well the peak time they call it, not the rush hour. The peak time train which is the busiest and the most expensive was actually the one that they cut the carriage size in half recently. And this is obviously not very comfortable for a lot of people travelling to work or other things at that time of day.  I mean they do this sort of thing occasionally, the train networks. I remember they kicked up a lot of fuss about the overnight train from Penzance to London and they have to have a lot of people speak about it before they put it back because they said it wasn’t making money and yes its …that’s a fact about the trains is the particular time of year is a very big factor because there ar a lot of tourists who would go down to Cornwall at a certain time of year.  I mean personally though to slightly change that I think that I would like to use the National Express a bit more. I find it very convenient certainly where I study in East Anglia to go to London and then also to catch a connection if you travel through London it’s very convenient, the National Express because they all arrive there and then you can carry on.  If you are not doing that central part of the southern half of the UK then it’s a bit more difficult to go from large city to large city.  It’s always been National Express about going north and south really.  But they are all suited to finding good times when people want to use more coaches frequently and then they lay them on and it’s almost as if the drivers are a little more on call.  I won’t say they are more or less flexible because i don’t know what the stringent circumstances that they work in. But they do, they change it around, I know they cut down certain…. .and they are always revising it.  I think that’s a good thing.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks. Thomas, can you reconsider for me.  you may be know…. When did your travel mode of your travel behaviour in general change?  Has there been changed over the last couple of months, years?
Thomas: Last year was probably the ….. Basically we moved.  We were living about 6 miles outside of Crediton in a small hamlet and we move back into Crediton. And that has meant as I say the shopping is just… we walk into town.  Before we had to drive everywhere.   The children now walk to school.  Before they had to get the bus or the train. And the other change I would say in the last 12 months was probably with us working in Ireland because I stopped flying over there as we would have to drive to Liverpool in the evening. You get on the boat, you have your dinner and you go to bed.  And you get up the following morning.  And we use that now,  Or I use that.  Apart from going on holiday I don’t think I’ve flown now for about 12 months probably but I’ve made 7 or 8 trips to Ireland but always by ferry. 
Moderator: Why did you change with Ireland?
Thomas: I find it more convenient.  The idea of travelling and sleeping makes sense to me.  I get to Ireland at 6.30am, I go to where I am going, I get a full days work.  If I want to come back the ferry doesn’t leave till 10pm so I can go and have an evening meal.  I find it more relaxed than i would having to…. I used to drive to Bristol airport because the times out of Exeter are useless. And I could do it in a day but the day would start at 5am and finish it about 1.30pm.  And I just find the whole ferry just suited me a lot more.  It’s a lot less stressful and altogether more pleasant.  So those are probably the two big issues.  
Moderator: And for you Jessica?
Jessica: Well [22.58] changed.  Use the car less I suppose and use the bus more?
Moderator: And why?
Jessica: Well, just trying to use the car less because a) I can’t afford it because of the price of petrol.  And b) I took advantage of this scheme on the buses which i think is wonderful if you are retired.
Moderator: Ok.  Great.  Simon, did something change for you or when did it change last time?
Simon: Yes.  Well it was almost a conscious decision in saying that I had practically…I had decided for practical reasons that the car wouldn’t’ be as useful although I can’t commit to saying that I wouldn’t have taken it to my study place in Cambridgeshire…… had I not found out that the regulations of the university there stated that no student of our university is allowed to own and use a car within the city limits.  Now I think this is really good. Obviously this does not occur twice a year when you arrive and you depart, I think that’s allowed but it’s not spelt out in that way. But….. yeah…and this was an added benefit because the mileage I was doing from changing from part to full time, the mileage I was doing, leaving my car behind cut my car insurance by £200 which is …that would pay for a whole year of taking the bus.  Around the city of Cambridge and the bus also I take I would say 8 or 9 miles outside to visit my relatives, and to babysit for them. And I do that for them once a week.  So I am not just within the city taking buses, which seemed quite expensive sometimes. The short journeys. Its as if they say if everyone wants to jump on the bus when its raining, think about it because you could be doing it quite  lot if we have a bad year.  But the other journeys, the slightly longer ones, they are good and I am pleased about that moneysaving and the regulation.
Moderator: Thanks. Thomas, you mentioned you moved into Crediton.  Do you think the way you wanted to travel influenced this decision or is it the opposite way around?  Does the new chosen place of residence influence your way?
Thomas:  I think it’s probably both I think I wanted to be closer to the schools for the children. I like the fact that hey can leave the house and walk to school and walk back from school.  It was a consideration that we would simply save a lot of petrol.  If you live 6 or 7 miles out. It’s surprising how much it costs you in a week to a car. So there was that decision as well.  Which was an economic decision.  And plus i wanted to be back in the town.  So I think it did have an impact yeah.  
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks.  Let’s come back to holiday travel.  Jessica?  How often do you go on holidays and where do you go and how?
Jessica:  Oh well we often go down to Cornwall as I said [26.56].  We usually go around the UK for a holiday.
: 
Moderator: So for you it’s not going abroad?
Jessica: No.  We just like to see around this country. We often go to Wales. Drive to Wales.  Simply because of the part we go is very remote.  I think if we went by train, my preferred way of travel, we’d have to go the …. I think its Hereford or somewhere and catch a train to Cardiff and then up the west coast to Dolgellau or something and then get a taxi, so you know its ….Tomorrow we are using the car.  As is said with two of us it’s cheaper to go by train [27.56 bus would take too long.  We could both go free on the bus.
Moderator: Simon, you mentioned you don’t often fly back to Hong Kong.  
Simon: No.
Moderator: So your main travel is for study reasons?  You mentioned these courses?
Simon: My main travel is…. I would say the holidays and the study leave are about equal.  For instance one year I would make a study leave and then the next year I would go on holiday but I don’t use planes every year.  And this has been the case for a long time.  The cost of air travel and with you know, the amount of air travel that happens these days, its not as care free as it used to be. Mostly short journeys yes.  Just in Europe, only I would say the average flight time…a couple of hours at the most.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks.  Thomas, holiday travel for you?
Thomas: Just depends where we are going.  If we are holidaying in this country we would drive.  Last year we borrowed a friend’s camper van, drove that.  Skiing this year, there’s a large group of use going so we flew down. But if it was just me and my family I would consider driving down. But as there was a group of use we flew down.  If we are going aborad we usually fly.  Occasionally we’ve taken a car into France but…
Moderator: Do you think your holiday travel changed during lets say the last years? And if so, how?
Thomas: Only in the sense that we probably go abroad less then we did. I know this sounds awful, I just hate travelling generally. I hate flying as well.  It doesn’t scare me but I don’t like the airports.  I don’t like the whole process.
Moderator: Not convenient for you?
Thomas: It would have been lovely if …done in the 70s when you travelled like a lord, but not any more, it’s just a cattle market and I don’t enjoy that experience.  So I would say if anything we are taking less foreign holidays then we holiday here. Which is often just driving or camper van.
Moderator: Ok, thanks.  Jessica, did something change for you?
Jessica: Yeah we used to take the train all the time.
Moderator: In former years?
Jessica: Yeah.  So before the fares went up so much it used to be the best option.  So we thought we’d have a couple of days up to Yorkshire when my son graduated.  Well, didn’t think about taking the car, just took the train.  Enjoyed it.
Moderator: And what would you say is the main reason that it changed?
Jessica: The cost.  And it got to the fact that [31.27] a bit difficult. We found that when he graduated at the very end, we brought the car that time, but only because it was such a hassle to get to the train. It was just after it had been privatised. And I rang them up and …. Oh you want… I forget what they were called then, something [31.52] around the east coast line and you had to buy a ticket from somebody else [31.58] oh it was terrible.
Moderator: Simon, did something change for you?  Do you travel less or more on different….?
Simon: Yes.  Much less air travel as I was saying before.  Living in south east asia….i think the travel there was similar in a way to much of travel between Uk and the rest of Europe in that you visit south…well, from the main land to the islands you visit the different parts of south east asia, so you are talking about, not even middle length, quite short air flight journeys.  Occasionally yes you’d make a journey to Australia which is more of a long haul flight.  Yes, there were flights that I did say 5 or 6 times from Hong Kong to UK.  Now they are the long haul flights.  And of course important family get to togethers for significant meetings, you know when something happens in the family.  But on those occasions we didn’t tend to go as a complete family and the close relatives would go. Now since my family relocated to the UK, we don’t do that anymore. Since Left Hong Kong in 1997 I’ve been back 3 times i think.  And twice of them when my parents still lived there.  So that was a family thing.  Now, its handy enough to communicate by email or telephone, you can spend long times talking on the telephone, getting all the news and gossip and everything, but like I said if there’s an important family meeting needed, then obviously that will happen on an occasion.
Moderator: Ok thanks.  One additional question for you Thomas.  Do you travel differently when you are on holiday at your destination?
Thomas: I don’t think there has been change.  Yeah we used to fly somewhere, I mean obviously skiing we didn’t hire a car going to the resort, that was fine. But often if we were going somewhere that was hot, I would usually hire a car when we got there.  I have never been on a package holiday, always travelled independently.  And that’s just been part of you know, you get to the airport and you need a car so we’d always hire a car. And I think i would still that.  I don’t think that would be a change.  And also I’m not one of these people, if I go somewhere hot, I don’t want to stay in the resort i want to see the place as well. And that’s the convenient way of doing it.  So no, I don’t think there is anywhere change there I would carry on doing what I always did do.
Moderator: Ok.  Let me mention something else.  We, so to say we researchers use the term sustainable travel.  Do you know maybe what this means and can you explain what this could – travelling sustainably?
Simon: Well in a nutshell I think…what is it……the amount of space that is utilised by the commuter or inversely the amount of wasted space that is you,,,, energy is expended when people don’t take up all the seats.  I think that’s really what I think.
Moderator: Anybody else?  Jessica what do you think?  No idea.
Jessica: Well, I haven’t thought about it actually.  Get more conscious about green issues.  Especially with a  view to the car, which is a sore point for our family because my wife prefers the car to the train.  .  So, no, no.
Moderator: Ok. Yeah just as a general explanation it’s pretty much related to environmental issues and environmentally friendly means of transport and travel behaviour. And especially as you said about efficiency and energy use. In the long run, the sustainability approach looks at circumstances, living circumstances for future generations.
Jessica: When I was earning even then I never saw the point in getting in the car  and going to Exeter and going for the same price at a time I could catch a train or a bus.  I didn’t see the point.  Unless you’ve got a load of shopping of course,.  If you are going to a supermarket you’ve got to take the car haven’t you?
Moderator: No that’s Ok really.  Can you think about things that would make you travel more environmentally friendly . What should be necessary to make you change your travel behaviour towards more environmentally friendly modes of transport?
Thomas: I think an efficient service.  I think that’s a lot of what fails this country is the quality of service,. And i think the problem is it’s not a public service, they’re businesses. I’ve travelled in mid France or in Germany to some extent and you know you take the train in France, the train in France is a public service, its not trying to make a profit, so its efficient, it runs on time its about being a service and I think that’s probably the real change at least that needs to happen. But the biggest thing is the fact that I cannot often get where I want to go.  I can only get to 10 miles of where I want to go.  And the times often simply don’t suit me.  And I think that is the biggest single thing that probably keeps me back from…  I mean [39.22] move away from air travel is very little to with its environmental impact, ii mean what does it account for 1 ½ % of green house gas emissions.   It’s so negligible, it’s not going to make…. But it’s simply because I don’t enjoy the feeling of going through an airport with somebody prodding me with s tick which is how it feels now.  And i guess the ferry is probably a much more sustainable form of transport especially if it’s full which it always is.  So I think it’s just the convenience is the thing, the lack of a decent service, the lack of a good service  is really what stops me.
Moderator: Jessica do you agree or do you have different issues?
Jessica: Yeah I think with business especially.  Everything seems to be time orientated today. Time is money is a phrase they use to throw at me by one of my bosses. And I hated that expression, I really loathed it.  I mean, I look back to the days of British railways.  The national coal board and things like that.  That to me was a perfect system.  I just think privatisation and greed and capitalism is a cause of a lot of our problems today I am afraid. 
Moderator: Ok.  Simon, what would make it for you more attractive to use?  I mean you maybe use an environmentally friendly means of transport but can you think about something to attract people or young person to use them more?  I mean we heard about quality of service, maybe price to.
Simon: I think the young person is probably the hardest person to sway because in the event that they do go travelling they want to travel the furthest and the furthest flung place that they can and not necessarily to somebody else’s schedule. I used to think about doing this kind of travelling before. Its very attractive to a certain age group and now I think its perhaps not such a good idea to go travelling to say somewhere like South America or something, you know get the plane all the way out there, get either train or a bus from the airport and pretend you’ve found yourself and either meet some trekkers or something like that.  I mean, I think the most interesting thing would be to have for want of a better description, of sites of interest , the 7 wonders of the world aren’t always the easiest places to get to.  but they are appealing to certain….and they can be the alternative to actually going and …I’m not talking about…some students go back packing in Europe and that…. And they find jobs from one place to another and whether they are working on organic farms or you know doing this kind of labour, this is a different kind of experience, different kind of cultural experience.  To the one where they go off into the wilderness and pretend they are going to find themselves.  I think that – if you could move their sights from to something that older generations are more interested in without letting them know that older generations are interested in, and make that kind of transport more effective.  Then that would be great.
Moderator: There are already some measures to try to force people to change their travel behaviour.  I want to mention two things and want to hear about your opinion regarding road pricing or congestion charging.  What do you think about that?
Thomas: Oh. Its’ a difficult one because I can see from ethical points of view I can see that it makes sense.  But from a personal point of view it would be bloody inconvenient and expensive.  I do a lot of driving.  I suppose if that was the case, then ultimately my customers would pay for whatever it was costing me to travel around so that would be the knock on.  but it’s a difficult one because I think as a measure its probably just about justified but for me I’d be ……on the other hand [44.38]
Moderator: Jessica?
Jessica: Like Thomas, I am all in favour and see his problem nevertheless, but personally I am in favour of it, very much so.  
Moderator: Do you think it would work?
Jessica: Yes.  I am sure it would.  Given good will which unfortunately from some people we don’t get.
Moderator: Simon?
Simon: Sorry what was the question?
Moderator: The question was about congestion charging and road pricing.
Simon: Oh its inevitable and necessary and the only practically solution at the moment I am surprised some areas of the States aren’t going militant about it by now and other places, NICs, you know it has to happen and I think its reflected in the style of vehicles that come out now.  Yes they are bigger, yes they use more fuel but at the end of the day you know you might have to get your children to brush their teeth and put on their school clothes just to get them to school if that’s the way you do it, and it costs a congestion charge and that size of car, that’s what has to be done now.  What the question really is about money –that money does it go the material that the cars run on, paving all these roads, continuously or does it go into helping car manufacturers develop cleaner more efficient cars that run on alternatives, good alternatives.
Moderator: Ok great.  A couple of more measures. Have you ever heard about so called green travel plans or green travel  week?
All: No.
Moderator: Have you heard about car sharing schemes?  Car Share Devon maybe?  That’s something well known?
Thomas: Ahem.  I’ve seen that certainly yes.
Moderator: Would it work for you?  Not that well i think?
Thomas: No.  I haven’t got a fixed place of work  really this is the issue.  But I’ve seen…I can appreciate the concept.  I think if I had a fixed place of work I would use it. Certainly like in the States, ive enjoyed the convenience of being able to use the outside lane – I don’t know if you are aware , in certain states they have a lane which is for people with cars that have passengers on board.  So there are…but there are no incentives like that in this country.  I would use it if I could. But it doesn’t suit me now.  
Moderator: That’s another thing.  I don’t know if its Exeter based but do you know Travel Smart as a scheme? No.  That’s OK.  Last question in this section is I may have mentioned it before –you mentioned it Simon but i would also ask you.  Do you think these measures towards environmentally friendly transport should also include holiday travel?  Can people be forced to lets ay go on holiday less frequently or use a different means of transport of go to different destinations?  Jessica?
Jessica: [48.24] not really.
Moderator: Ok.  Is it too harsh or…?
Jessica: Yeah it would be.  I think you’ve got to educate people to use their common sense.
Moderator: Thomas what do you think?
Thomas: I think it’s at risky one. I think if you made deliberate and upfront measures, you know if it was very clearly  targeted at people and their holiday I think maybe that wouldn’t be well received.  I think obviously that… no, i think it would be.  As simple as that.  I’m just thinking aloud talks before where they’ve talked apart putting levies on budget flights and taxing budget flight tickets.  How well it’s been received.  So now I think it would be  a difficult one.
Moderator: Ok thanks.  Another issue on my list.  Slight change of topic – sustainable or environmentally friendly behaviour at home, in your house, not travelling, everything else. What do you think you can do to behave more sustainable at home?  Simon, do you do something maybe?
Simon: Avoid packaging in consumables.  And when you do happen to buy usually the liquid containers , plastic ones that can’t be recycled, I don’t se the point in people throwing these away without squashing them.  They fill up a bin bag with bottles that are empty when you could stuff them full of all the thin polythene bags you get your fruit in or chocolate wrappers, mars bar wrappers. Any of these little bits and things, cut the top of your bottles and fill them with that so that if one day by luck your bin bag…I mean my family sometimes, some weeks my parents when they are at home alone, they just fill a bread bag a week full of rubbish.  The orange peel goes in the bin because it can’ be composted.  But everything else goes in the brown bin and then gets but you know, one day should your bin bag see a good incinerator, clean incinerator then it should be compact and not airy and….. because that just makes the flames burst out instead of creating an intense heat – that’s combustion. So it should work properly.
Moderator: Ok, great.  Anything else, Jessica? What are you doing or can you think about something ese?
Jessica: Well just like we are all trying to keep the newspapers, but is all time again with these things.  I mean I’ve got the time, we’ve got the time, but a lot of people haven’t because they’re all in such a mad rush.  But we can do it. We crush our tins.  And squash our milk cartons. We do that of course.
Moderator: Anything else maybe?  Anything else environmental related that you do at home?
Jessica: Yeah I go through… even today I had a cardboard box something came in and tore it up to go in the bag and I noticed it was covered with a thin film of plastic. They won’t take that of course so I peeled it off.  It took about 20 minutes.
Moderator: But you did it!
Jessica: I did it.  But I’ve got the time being retired.
Moderator: And you can imagine that some people don’t have the time?
Jessica: Of course they would.  They’d put it in the other bin.
Moderator: So what do you think could attract people to behave more environmentally friendly at home?
Jessica: Well I think that people are sort of realising that we can’t go on as we are with landfill and chucking stuff about.  We are a dirty nation I have come to the conclusion, the British.  Everyone tells me they go on the continent and that it’s so much cleaner then here. You go out in the countryside and walk along beside the road and  you see tin cans, crisp packets.  Apparently you don’t get it in France and Germany. We were always told that we were clean and the French were dirty.  My dad always said. He’d never been to France.  But it’s the other way around, we’re the dirty people in this world.
Moderator: Thomas? What do you do and what ….?
Thomas: Well, we recycle everything that we can.  We’re pretty good at that I think. We use low energy light bulbs throughout the house.
Jessica: Yeah I tried them a bit.  They’re alright, we’ve got them except for places where you just…. Like in hall for instance, it takes a bit of…
Jessica: Yeah they take a little bit of a while to warm up that’s true, but I like them. I like the fact that they last that’s the other thing.  And the heating and things, I keep a pretty close eye.  We’ve got individual thermostats for all the rooms, but currently my motivation is as much financial as it is environmental.  
Moderator: So once again the price also is what could encourage people.
Thomas: Yes and I am not…I’m relatively well informed and there isn’t an endless supply of energy, it’s going to only get more and more expensive so, now  is the time to get to used to other practices and being as sustainable as you can.  So yeah I’m not too bad.
Moderator: So in general do you think it is necessary to do these things we just mentioned.  What do you think?
Jessica: Yeah very much so.  I mean its young peoples futures isn’t it?  In my opinion anyway.  I don’t know what sort of world we are leaving them.
Moderator: Simon what do you think?
Simon: Yes I would like to say that the recycling schemes are very well in place to my knowledge in the areas that I use consumables. And generally I think people are learning to….once they’ve experienced it on their own terms for a little while.  You know i am talking about the general student here. I think they do try and make a choice in general for the better.  I think there are still trends that… you know. I think there’s… the general accommodations there’s 150 students, there are notices in place in every kitchenette and all the students walk past the recycling area every day when they leave and they come back.  You could make it more strict but how far do you want to push the boat out. I mean I remember they changed the bins in our kitchenettes because they weren’t big enough, the general refuse bins.  And I mentioned this to another flat mate and we were in agreement saying that they should have left old bin as well and we could have used that for a  recycling bin.  Actually in the kitchen even though the recycling unit is only 50 yards outside on the quad.  Because there are still people within the accommodation that throw everything into the bin and that’s not good.  I think the improvements with the freezer and fridges efficiencies is really good.  The new measurement, I don’t know the actual values of improvement.  That makes people wary.  That tends to make the girls who throw out all this rubbish into the refuse more wary, you know, if you took them to Curry’s they’d be like right I want the most efficient fridge, most efficient freezer, I don’t want to de-ice it ever, and so you buy them one of them, but sometimes you  just cant’ get them to recycle things that go in the black bin bags.  Oh and, yeah I always tell people about using eco friendly washing liquid and things like that.
Moderator: Interesting. Thanks a lot.  I’ve one last question for you all in general.  We are talking about a lot of things….. How you can behave environmentally friendly at home – is your behaviour a home somehow linked to your daily travel behaviour or your travel behaviour in general?  What do you think?  Is there a link or is it completely different or separate?
Jessica: I don’t think its…
Moderator: It’s not linked?
Jessica: Not really.
Thomas: I think it is a little.  It makes me sound like I’m some sort of notorious skin flint but I am not.  Again a lot of the changes I think, moving back into Crediton, our family car now, quite often won’t move from Monday to Friday. We may use it at the weekend and our fuel Thomass have dropped from £60 a week to £20 a week. Now that I am quite pleased that has a positive environmental impact, but I am very pleased that it has a positive economic impact as well. I think the way I live at home is influencing more and more how travel as well.  But it’s a fairly recent thing I would say.
Jessica: How many miles do you reckon you travel in your family car?
Thomas: We’ve done about…. In the last 2 months…about 1500 miles, I think something like that.
Jessica: So annually it would be….?
Thomas: I guess we probably do 6 or 7000 miles a year maybe.  But I’ve got family in he Midlands and in South Wales and that kind of things.
Jessica: Yeah we’re usually [59.25] trip up to [59.27] and most of its local.
Thomas: Yeah.  But i would say it barely moves…at the moment it barely moves from Monday to Friday which is great.
Jessica: My Missus is a [59.42] and she won’t…. decides she wants something from Somerfield and [59.46] get the car and drive down to Somerfield and back and that’s just [59.54] so cold isn’t it?  But I know one person believe it or not drives from [60.05] in her car to shop, which is ….
Thomas: All you need is children, that’s how I do it, I just kick my kids out the house and send them,.
Jessica: It’s unbelievable.
Moderator: Ok.  Thanks a lot. The very last thing I wanted to ask you and this  is to answer 4 more questions….. to get another general idea….. Thank you very much. 