Interviewer: So the first thing I wanted to ask you about, Helen, is could you please maybe tell us a little bit about the diary experiences? How did you find it?
Participant: How do you mean? Sort of being easy, or…
Interviewer: Both, yes. Both the easy bits and something that was probably a bit more difficult for you.
Participant: Yes, no, it was very easy, yes, yes. Especially being as, I mean, a lot of the time, I mean I don’t do an awful lot of shopping, so you know, a lot of the time it was just going straight to the last few questions, really, because I hadn’t been anywhere that day, so that was quite easy.
Interviewer: Was there anything difficult to write down at all?
Participant: No, not really. I was, hang on, can I swap ears? Hang on a minute. It’s alright, I’ve got a bit of tinnitus in that one ear, so I find it easier to listen in the other ear. I, the only thing I was a bit worrying about was whether you class cigarettes as consumables, really, so I got a bit confused on that one, but I think I wrote in the panel underneath that that’s what I’d bought, so, and I explained there that I wasn’t sure whether you class that as being consumed or anything.
Interviewer: Yes, and did anything surprise you in the diary at all?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: Yes, to answer your question, yes, we focus mainly on food shopping here, so yes. Not really, I don’t think we really include, we even don’t really ask much about, you know, cleaning products and everything. We mostly focus on food shopping, but it’s, you know, if you mentioned that, that’s okay. Okay, so maybe we can move to the next part, and talk a little bit about your shopping routine, if that’s okay.
Participant: Yes. Yes.
Interviewer: Could you please describe in your own words your typical food shopping trip? What is it like?
Participant: Well I don’t think I actually have a typical one, because living on my own I tend to sort of pop out and get bits as I need them really, rather than, you know, when I had the kids at home it was, like, doing a big shop, and I don’t do that anymore, I just tend to pop out and get bits that I might need, you know, for instance today I have gone to the shop today, because I had to go to sign on, and Aldi is just up the road from where I sign on, so I did pop in there and get a few little bits today, but, and that will probably be the last shopping I do this week. You know, it’s just as and when I need things, really.
Interviewer: So how many times a week or a month do you usually go shopping?
Participant: That’s a good question, really. I don’t honestly know.
Interviewer: Well just on average.
Participant: I might pop out, say, a couple of times a week perhaps, doing bits of shopping. Yes, that’s probably it, yes, more likely.
Interviewer: And do you have a main shop, or is it…
Participant: I have been trying to get into doing a main shop, yes, it’s just getting myself organised into doing that, you know, I have been doing that the past couple of weeks, I’ve got to admit, you know, it’s more doing one shop rather than half a dozen little trips, so yes. Plus cheaper, really. I’m trying to go to Aldi, because it’s cheaper.
Interviewer: So is Aldi the only supermarket you go to, or are there different ones?
Participant: Yes, really, supermarket-wise. I don’t really, unless I go online, if I do anything online then I’m likely to go, because Aldi doesn’t do an online service, so sometimes I might go online, so, but like I said, this week, I went to Aldi this week.
Interviewer: What kind of online shops do you use?
Participant: Usually Tesco or Asda, because I think they’re a more reasonably priced supermarket.
Interviewer: When you do an online shop, do you do a big one usually?
Participant: No, not usually a huge big one, it’s usually, you know, up to what they want. They usually want a minimum of £40, so I wouldn’t say that was a huge shop, but yes, so it’s usually round about that. If I do end up doing that regular, it would only be every couple of weeks I would, you know, do a big shop like that, so, because of only being me in the house, you know.
Interviewer: Yes, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Well, I tend to think of what I might like, or you know, I might buy, like, a joint of meat and then make that do for quite a while, for several different meals, do you follow what I mean? I bought a, I think it was last week I bought a, like a joint of gammon, and I made that go a long way, you know. Various meals with it, because you know, only one, you know, and then really it’s just down to, you know, what you’re running out of and what you might need, really, and I mean, usually there’s milk involved, and every so often, coffee, because I do like my coffee, so you know, and vegetables to go with it. That sort of thing, really.
Interviewer: Yes, and what is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: Beg your pardon?
Interviewer: What is important to you when choosing food?
Participant: Value, obviously, and whether I like it, basically. I do like my vegetables. I’m not a great fruit eater, I’m not over fond of fruit, but I haven’t got a sweet tooth, that’s why, so I do like lots of vegetables and things, so yes, so that’s mainly important to me, really.
Interviewer: What is less important?
Participant: Well, like I said, fruit. Any sweet stuff, really. Like I said, I haven’t really got a sweet tooth, so you know, I wouldn’t really be going for cakes and biscuits and that sort of thing.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. How do you usually travel when you go food shopping?
Participant: Oh, it’s waking usually.
Interviewer: So are they all walking distances, the shops?
Participant: Yes, I mean, it would take me about ten minutes to a quarter of an hour to walk to, well, any of the supermarkets around here, really. So I usually walk, because the bus route doesn’t actually take me directly to the shop, if you see what I mean.
Interviewer: Yes. Of those supermarkets where you go physically, you mentioned Aldi. Are there any other, maybe not supermarkets, but maybe shops or, you know, anywhere else?
Participant: Yes, the Costcutter which is just across the road from me. So if I do run out of something and need something urgent, I will just pop down there, because that’s, what, two minutes away from where I live.
Interviewer: Okay. When you go food shopping, do you go usually on your own or with other people?
Participant: No, it’s always on my own.
Interviewer: Yes, and regarding the waste, the food waste, does it ever happen to you not to use something that you’ve bought, some of the fresher products, probably, or something else that goes to waste?
Participant: Yes, sometimes things go off, you don’t get a chance to eat them, but that’s why I try not to buy too much stuff at once, do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Because I don’t like to waste stuff. I suppose it’s the way I was brought up, you know, you eat what’s on your plate and, you know, and my mum used to make a joint go around, you know, for a couple of days, so yes, so it’s sort of the way I’ve been brought up, really, to try not to waste food.
Interviewer: Yes, sure.
Participant: I’ve got to admit, a lot of the waste does come from my children, because they come to visit on a Sunday, and one of them yesterday wasn’t feeling too well, so she didn’t eat her dinner, so you know, she wasted that, so…
Interviewer: Yes. Okay. Is there anything else that you would like to add maybe to your food shopping trip, before we move onto the next set of questions?
Participant: No, no. Yes, I think that’s about it, really. Yes.
Interviewer: Great. So maybe the next thing that I wanted to ask you is a little bit unusual. Could you please tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear ‘supermarket plastic bag’.
Participant: A plastic bag?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Well, I reuse them for waste. So to me, if I have plastic bags, they go out with the rubbish, you know, I put the rubbish rubbish out, you know, in those. Not recyclable rubbish, but you know, ordinary rubbish. I don’t really use a lot of plastic bags. I think I told you, you know, when we had that interview before, that I’ve got a shopping trolley.
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: And that usually goes with me, you know. If I’m going to do a shop, like today, you know, I knew I wanted a few things, so the shopping trolley went with me. So you know, I don’t really have a lot of carrier bags around.
Interviewer: Do you remember at all the point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Do I remember when I saw them for the first time?
Interviewer: Yes, you came across them. Yes, you saw them.
Participant: Oh, good lord, no, I can’t.
Interviewer: Do you remember the time when there were no bags yet?
Participant: No, I don’t. I suppose it must have been in my lifetime, but I really couldn’t tell you. No, I don’t remember at all. Oh, excuse me.
Interviewer: Yes, so you mentioned now that you, you know, you like to bring your shopping trolley to the shops, and what is the reason for using that?
Participant: I find it easier to carry, because I suffer with my back and my arm, so having a whole load of shopping, you know, dangling off your arms in carrier bags, and they hurt your hands and everything, so it’s a lot easier to put it in my trolley and wheel it, you know, I just wheel it and that doesn’t hurt. So that is easier for me. So I’ve had a shopping trolley now for, oh, five or six years.
Interviewer: Sure, yes, and the plastic bags, you mentioned that you reuse for rubbish, etc, do you, how often do you take those, or how many would you say a month?
Participant: A month? Well, there’s probably, there’s probably, it’s probably one recycling and one rubbish, probably, per week, I would think. Yes. Because I recycle everything that, you know, I can. So, you know, your tins and your milk bottles and things like that, you know, they all get recycled. So yes, probably, you know, a bag of each a week, I would think.
Interviewer: Do you take those bags on purpose from supermarkets or do you bring something in them from the shop?
Participant: Well, like I said last week in the survey thing, the one time I was distracted and they put all my shopping in a bag before I’d realised what they’d done, but normally, especially if it’s just down the road to the Costcutter, I wouldn’t bother with a bag because you know, even my handbag is quite big, so I can even fit things in that, you know, but I wouldn’t bother with a bag, so the times they’ve come into the house it’s been, like, an accident or, like, when the children come, they might go down to the Costcutter to, you know, buy stuff for themselves, and they might come back with a bag, so yes.
Interviewer: And you don’t normally take bags?
Participant: No, not usually. Like I said, it’s my trolley most of the time.
Interviewer: Why don’t you take them?
Participant: Well, I wouldn’t even think about it, to be quite truthful, because like I say, I’ve always got my trolley, but I think if I didn’t have the trolley, I probably would reuse them in that way, I think.
Interviewer: Yes, but for instance, when you go to Costcutter you bring things in your own bags. Is there any, kind of, obvious reason for why you’re doing that?
Participant: Well, because it’s not usually a lot I get from down there, you see what I mean? It’s the odd thing, like, for example, over, when was it, yesterday, I think it was, I ran out of toilet roll. So I just popped down there to get some toilet roll, but I’m not going to bother with a bag just for that, you know, because the Costcutter is so close, and you don’t need a bag for carrying those home, you know.
Interviewer: True, yes. In your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Well, to me, it’s not important at all, basically, because like I said, I take my trolley. So to me, you know, I can understand that for other people it probably is important, but to me, no, it’s not important at all.
Interviewer: What if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores? What do you think?
Participant: It wouldn’t bother me. You know, it’s quite, I mean, they don’t degrade very well, do they, unless they’re making them better these days, I don’t know, but you know, it wouldn’t bother me if I never saw one again, to be quite truthful.
Interviewer: Yes, and you mentioned that you reuse the plastic bags for the garbage. Is there any other ways of reusing them that you have?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, that’s the only one, yes?
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: It’s alright, I’m just having a think. No.
Interviewer: Yes, and does it happen to you to just get rid of them? You know, put them in the rubbish or in the recycling?
Participant: Yes, they just go in the rubbish.
Interviewer: So sometimes you just throw them away as well, yes?
Participant: Well they’ve usually got rubbish in them, if you see what I mean.
Interviewer: Oh yes, but I meant, yes.
Participant: So they just get thrown, yes.
Interviewer: Sure, yes, and do you have any of those bags for life?
Participant: Yes, yes, I’ve got a couple of those, yes.
Interviewer: How do you use those?
Participant: I don’t.
Interviewer: You don’t?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Did you buy them, or did anyone bring them in?
Participant: I think I did buy them, yes, when I was, when I didn’t have, you know, before I had my trolley. I bought them then, before I had my trolley, but of course now, since I’ve got my trolley, they are in the cupboard doing nothing now, really.
Interviewer: Are they the big bags for life?
Participant: Yes, they’re quite big ones, yes.
Interviewer: Yes, and how many small plastic bags have you got at home at the moment, do you reckon?
Participant: At the moment? Probably about ten, I think.
Interviewer: Something like that, yes. Sure, yes. Do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, there isn’t any charge. Well, there is in Aldi, and I don’t know how much it is, I’m afraid, but they do charge in Aldi, but I can’t remember how much they charge for them.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Well, in fact plastic bag charge is a national charge of 5p on single use plastic carrier bags, so that’s the thin ones, you know, the very, very, the thinnest you imagine.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: This is, yes, so basically 5p. What do you think about this kind of charge?
Participant: I think it might make people think about what they’re doing, really.
Interviewer: In terms of?
Participant: Yes, rubbish and, you know, sort of recycling. Might have a little think about it, you know. Like I said, to me it doesn’t matter, because you know, I very rarely will use one, you know. It’s all my trolley.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that such a charge exists, or not?
Participant: No, I don’t find it surprising because it’s already in Wales, isn’t it? It has been for quite a while, hasn’t it, I think? So no, I don’t find it surprising.
Interviewer: What do you think is good about it, and what is not as good? In your opinion.
Participant: Well, I think making people think a bit more about, you know, what they’re chucking out and how viable it is to degrade down, do you know what I mean? If it makes people think a bit more about that sort of thing, I think it’s a good thing. I probably do feel for people perhaps in my situation who haven’t got a lot of money, and don’t really want to be charged for a carrier bag, that haven’t got a trolley like me, but no, yes, I think it’s a good thing, really.
Interviewer: Yes, and did you know that this 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yes, I did.
Interviewer: You did? Yes. When did you hear about it for the first time?
Participant: I don’t know if it was you or whether, I think I might have seen it on the news. I think they have mentioned it on the news. Yes, I’m pretty sure they have, because I think that’s how I knew, you know, that they already charged in Wales, yes. So I can’t tell you when, but I’m pretty sure I heard about it on the news at some stage.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of this charge?
Participant: The what?
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of this charge?
Participant: I think probably to make people think about, you know, rubbish and it being degradable and that sort of thing.
Interviewer: Yes, and do you think it will fulfil these purposes in England, when it’s introduced?
Participant: I think it might with some people. I think there’s, you know, still a lot of apathy with other people that probably, you know, wouldn’t worry one way or the other, so I haven’t really, you know, some people will like, some people won’t, I presume.
Interviewer: Sure. Do you think the introduction of the 5p charge will affect you personally or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Not at all? Yes. Well for instance, if you are not, how would you adapt to the fact that you cannot come unprepared to the shop unless you are prepared to pay 5p for the bag? What do you think about that?
Participant: Well, like I said, it wouldn’t affect me, because you know, I’ve always got my trolley.
Interviewer: You also said that sometimes you have to take those, if you, probably, didn’t, you know, expect to come to a shop.
Participant: Yes, but that wouldn’t really happen, because you know, I always, you know, I know when I’m going to go and do a shop that I need to carry heavy items, if you see what I mean. So the trolley would always come with me if I knew I was going on a shop like that.
Interviewer: So will you always come prepared, basically?
Participant: Yes. Yes. I mean, today I knew I was going to get milk and a couple of tins of things, and lemonade. You know, one of those big bottles of lemonade, so I knew it was going to be a heavy shop, so you know, automatically the trolley comes out and, you know, away I go with it.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in the country at the moment?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: What kind of impression do you have when you go to a supermarket yourself? Into a shop?
Participant: I don’t know. I mean, I’ve never seen any notices. I mean, I think the bags have got, have they got stuff written on them? I know where I used to live, I used to shop at a Co-Op, and I know their bags had got written on it, “please try and reuse me”, sort of thing, but I can’t say that I’ve noticed. I haven’t really noticed anything recently, in all honesty. I suppose it’s where I just, you know, very rarely have the carrier bags.
Interviewer: Yes, and what do you think about bags for life?
Participant: Well they’re fine if you can carry them. Yes, that’s fine for people that, you know, have got the strength to carry them, but I haven’t, so you know, like I said, they’re just under the sink.
Interviewer: Yes, and why do you think they have been given this name?
Participant: So that people will reuse them, you know, rather than just binning them. I guess they’re made of solid-er stuff, aren’t they, than the usual carrier bags, so you can reuse them. I mean, chances are with the thinner ones, the handles are going to break and things like that, aren’t they?
Interviewer: Yes, and do you think that’s what people do with them?
Participant: What, reuse them?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: I’m sure a lot of people do, just as much as probably a lot of people don’t. It’s one of those things, isn’t it, really? It’s like I said before, it depends, you know, whether you think about the planet or you don’t, doesn’t it, really?
Interviewer: Yes. Did you know that when, I mean, basically it’s not a question, it’s the news that I’m sharing, that you know, the 5p charge when it comes into effect in England, there will be some types of bags and some types of shops that will not charge 5p. So basically the charges will not be applied. The shops will be medium to small retailers and corner shops, as well as takeaways and clothing shops. So those will not charge 5p for their bags. What do you think about this?
Participant: I don’t know. I did see this on, I did see this on telly, that is where I’ve seen it, yes, because they were talking about all sorts of different bags for different types of food. So like, for instance, putting your washing powder in with your, you know, edible stuff and things like that, and they were talking about having all sorts of different bags for it, but, oh sorry, I forgot what the question was now.
Interviewer: Yes, the different types of shops that will not charge for the bags.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Clothing…
Participant: Well I don’t know, I haven’t really thought about it.
Interviewer: Well basically, if only the big supermarkets charge for the bags, and the rest of the shops don’t, how do you find it?
Participant: I’ve not really thought about it, really. I suppose if they’ve got, you know, different sorts of items, I don’t know. No, not really thought about it. No.
Interviewer: What do you think about paper and biodegradable bags, which are also not going to be charged?
Participant: What, paper bags?
Interviewer: Paper and biodegradable, yes.
Participant: No, they’re alright, I don’t mind them. I’d put those straight into recycling, paper bags.
Interviewer: Okay, and well the thing why I’m asking this question is because also, in other parts of the UK, there is, like, a blanket charge for any kind of bags in any kind of shops, so basically England is the only country that will have the exemption for these types of shops and bags that I mentioned. What do you think about this?
Participant: I can’t say that I’ve got any opinion on it, really. I don’t know. No. I haven’t really got an opinion on that, really. Sorry, I’m not being very helpful, am I?
Interviewer: That’s okay. Yes, that’s fine. How do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges? Such as, for instance, higher fuel duties?
Participant: How does it compare?
Interviewer: Yes. To a raise of, to another type of charge which will be a rise of price of fuel for environmental reasons.
Participant: Oh, oh I’m with you. No, I haven’t really got an opinion on that, either, because I don’t have a car. So you know, I really wouldn’t give that, you know, too much thought.
Interviewer: How about another type of charge which doesn’t exist yet in the UK, but it exists in other places, on the continent, like in Germany, Austria. They have a little deposit that people pay in for plastic bottles, so when they buy something in plastic bottles, they pay a deposit in, and when they bring the bottle back, the plastic bottle back, they get the deposit back.
Participant: Oh. Oh, we used to do that years ago.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: I can remember doing that with pop bottles and things at my local shop, yes. You’d get a few bits of, a bit of pocket money back off your bottles, yes. I think that’s probably a good idea.
Interviewer: Okay, yes, and why do you think it’s a good idea?
Participant: Well, it’ll make people, you know, take their bottles back and reuse them. Recycle.
Interviewer: Sure, and what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the introduction of the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: I’ve got no idea. To be quite truthful, I think things would just, sort of, tootle along the same as they have done, really, because like I said, I think there’s always going to be, you’re always going to have people that want to recycle things, and you’re always going to have people that, you know, aren’t bothered. So I can’t see that it’s going to make that much difference, you know. Because if you’re one of the people that aren’t bothered about recycling, I think you’d just carry on the same, really.
Interviewer: What do you think about people in your neighbourhood, or what do you observe? Do they recycle?
Participant: Well, like I said, some people do, some people don’t. I mean, this morning, I mean, when I walk to Aldi and the Jobcentre today, I mean, I have to, I go through a cut through, you know, like an alleyway or a lane, if you like, and there’s always bottles and tins and goodness knows what, you know, littered all over the place, but I’m thinking it’s probably younger people, that perhaps that’s their gathering place of an evening, and they don’t, I mean, they don’t care about recycling, obviously, they just throw it all over the place, but that’s probably kids for you, isn’t it, really?
Interviewer: Yes, and now kind of switching to a different subject, what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well picking up after yourself and disposing of your rubbish, you know, sensibly and that sort of thing. Yes.
Interviewer: Does it include anything from waste related behaviours?
Participant: I haven’t really thought about that. No, I haven’t really thought about that, no. I suppose it would be just that sort of thing to me.
Interviewer: What can you, yourself, say that you do for the environment?
Participant: Well, I recycle and I don’t drop litter anywhere at all, unless it’s by accident and I haven’t noticed, like it’s fallen out of my pocket or something, but that very rarely happens. So yes, that’s what I do, really.
Interviewer: How are your recycling facilities where you live?
Participant: Oh, they’re good, yes.
Interviewer: What are they like?
Participant: We’ve got, like, a shed outside with all the bins in, and there’s several green bins for the rubbish rubbish, and several blue bins for your recycling, and there is a food waste bin. The only thing we haven’t got is a bin for the garden waste, I’ve noticed. I think we could do with that, but that’s, yes, no, it’s quite good, and they take the bins out, you know, all you, me, have to do is just take it out and put it in the bin, and then a chap comes along on the bin day and he takes all the bins out and puts them ready for the bin men, so that all works out quite well.
Interviewer: Good, yes, and do you tend to save water and energy at home?
Participant: Yes. Yes, I noticed that on the questionnaire, yes, I try not to flush too often, and I never leave the tap running if I’m brushing my teeth or whatever, so yes, and I only boil what I need, you know, so that, yes, so I am conscious of it, yes.
Interviewer: Are you on a water meter at all?
Participant: No, I’m not, no. Hello?
Interviewer: Yes, yes, yes. Okay. Yes. Does it happen to you to reuse any kind of things at home? You know, like, it can be anything, it can be related to, like, jars or tubs or papers.
Participant: Oh yes, yes.
Interviewer: Could you give a few examples?
Participant: Oh, I reused a coffee jar yesterday. I’d made some yoghurt, my daughter particularly liked it, so I decanted some of the yoghurt for her into a coffee jar and she took it home with her, so yes, that sort of thing, and I’ll, if I’ve got them, I don’t have them anymore, but I have got a couple that I’ve kept, like a takeaway tub, you know, like the Tupperware type things, you know, I’ll put things in there so, you know, they’re used all the time, so I quite often do things like that, yes.
Interviewer: Yes, great, and does it happen to you to buy any kind of products which are either eco-friendly or organic or sustainable? Fairtrade, free range, any of those?
Participant: I think the coffee I buy is Fairtrade, but I don’t buy it for that reason, I buy it because I like the coffee. So yes.
Interviewer: Any kind of free range products?
Participant: Not usually, no. I am aware of the, sort of, issues surrounding it, but it’s money, you know. I have to watch what I spend. I mean, the coffee I buy, even though it’s Fairtrade, I get it from Aldi, and it’s only £2 for a jar, which is still quite a reasonable price to me, for coffee. So you know, I’ll buy that, because it’s still quite reasonable, but I have to admit, things like eggs and things like that, I do tend to buy as cheap as I can find, in all honesty, and the same with meat. Obviously, you know. Yes, so yes, because it’s just basically money.
Interviewer: Yes, absolutely, yes. Does it happen to you to support environmental organisations? For instance by signing petitions or anything like that?
Participant: No, I’m not much of a one for signing petitions. The only thing I did do just, well, earlier on in the year, was I did apply for some seeds, to plant for the bees. I did do that, and of course then they ring you up and asking you for money, but I told them I didn’t have any to give, so they couldn’t have it, but no, but I did have the seeds and I will be planting them.
Interviewer: Why did you do that?
Participant: Because I’ve been hearing for years now that the bee population is not doing too well, and bees support most of our, what we eat and everything, don’t they? So if we lose them we’re going to lose a lot of stuff we eat, so yes. That’s why I did that, basically.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. How concerned are you, if at all, about environmental issues?
Participant: I suppose some I am and some, you know, not so much. I mean, like I said, I do, I am worried about the bees and things like that, and I don’t like to see rubbish and everything strewn around, I’ve got to admit, but I don’t suppose there’s a lot more, really, you know, I worry too much about.
Interviewer: Yes, that’s fine, yes. What does environment mean to you, just in general?
Participant: I don’t know. I don’t know how to answer that, so I’m not sure. It’s important. You know, but like I said, you know, there are some issues that I feel I can do things about and, you know, and other things I don’t think I’ve got any sort of control over at all, so…
Interviewer: Would you say those that you can do things about are more important than others?
Participant: Not more important, no, but if I can do something to help, I will do, you know, but I’m sure there are other important issues, but if I can’t do anything about it, you know, I can’t do anything about it. A lot of the time it seems to be, you know, people wanting money for various things, you know. Well, I can’t do that, you know, so…
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Would you say that environment is an important part of your identity or not?
Participant: Well, I wouldn’t say important part. I would say, you know, I just try to do my bit, where I can.
Interviewer: Are you concerned at all about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: Beg your pardon?
Interviewer: Are you concerned with the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: No, because I don’t think I do create that much waste, and I do dispose of it, you know, sensibly. So I put it in the right bins and recycle where I can.
Interviewer: For you, compared to other issues in modern society, things like, you know, social, economic, health issues, how important is environment, in relation to those?
Participant: Well, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Just for yourself, personally.
Participant: I don’t know. I really don’t know. I find it very difficult some of these questions. I honestly don’t know. No, I don’t know how to answer that one.
Interviewer: Well, for example, what would be more important to you, environment or social welfare? Things like that. Or environment and the health systems and how they are managed in the country?
Participant: No, I, that’s all politics, isn’t it? No, I never really go into that or think about that, so I suppose really environment would be more important to me than, you know, the other things, really. Yes. Yes.
Interviewer: Could you just, I’m just trying to clarify for myself. Could you explain that a little bit?
Participant: Well, to be quite truthful, any time I had to be, you know, hospitalised or, you know, I’ve always had really good treatment and it’s always gone very well, so I personally haven’t got any issues with, you know, the NHS or whatever. You know, because they’ve always treated me well and, you know, everything, so you know, I would be more worried about the environmental issues than NHS or anything like that.
Interviewer: For instance, the threats to the NHS, you know, the government wanting to cut the money, you know, the same with education, I suppose, and with other areas, like the cuts, budget cuts and things like that. Compared to you know, environmental problems?
Participant: Well I suppose if it ever affected me then probably I would be, but you know, like I said, at the moment, you know, I have always had good treatment, so I haven’t really worried about it.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. We’re kind of coming to the end, really. Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, probably not. I probably could learn, I mean, you learn all the time, don’t you? I could probably learn more and that, but you know, like I say, I do what I can, you know, about things I know about, so yes.
Interviewer: Would you say that you would like to learn more, or not?
Participant: I haven’t even really thought about it. Yes, I suppose I would, yes. I mean, I’ll listen to things about it on the news and that sort of thing.
Interviewer: How do you find the current, you know, information around environmental issues and questions, do you think?
Participant: I can’t say that I’ve ever looked for any information on it, so I wouldn’t really know.
Interviewer: Do you feel that there is enough information given among what you can, you know, see on the television, for instance? Newspapers?
Participant: Well, I suppose it’s, you know, what you, if you’re prepared to listen out for things, isn’t it, really? I mean, like the bees, I mean, I found out about the bees due to a news programme.
Interviewer: Yes, yes, exactly.
Participant: So it depends what you listen out for and what you hear, doesn’t it, really? You know. Yes.
Interviewer: Yes, and do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Well, like I said, I mean, the few little things I do do, it’s just, you know, common sense isn’t it, really? What I do, you know, like your rubbish and things like that, and you know, planting a few seeds for the bees. So you know, I can do that, so you know, but that’s easy enough, so yes.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive, or people receive enough support to be environmentally friendly? For instance from the government or environmental organisations?
Participant: I really wouldn’t know. I really wouldn’t know.
Interviewer: Do yourself feel supported, you know, by the government?
Participant: Not by the government, no. No.
Interviewer: By the council?
Participant: I would say, I mean, the seed thing, that’s a charity.
Interviewer: Right.
Participant: I can’t for the life of me remember what it was, but I don’t think that’s anything to do with the government. It’s one of those adverts you see on the telly, so no, I don’t think that’s got anything to do with the government, has it?
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: You are, yes?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What are you particularly happy with?
Participant: Well, you know, like I said, the recycling and the bees and that, and you know, I’m quite happy with that at the moment.
Interviewer: Would you say that you would like to change anything in what you are already doing?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Or improve or anything?
Participant: No. No, I shall probably carry on as I am doing.
Interviewer: Okay. Just the last question, what do you think, what do you find being the main problems in your neighbourhood? You know, where you live, and what do you like in the neighbourhood?
Participant: Well, to be quite truthful, I’ve only been living here a short while, really. I’ve come from a different area of Tewksbury altogether, so I don’t really feel, you know, that I could comment too much on that yet. I think I need to be here a little while longer before I could pass any comment about, you know, facilities or whatever in the area. I mean, what I’ve come across has been pretty good, but you know, I don’t know. I think I need to live here a little bit longer to find out more about what goes on. Do you follow what I mean?
Interviewer: Sure.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: But your, kind of, first perceptions?
Participant: Well I quite enjoy it around here at the moment, so you know, and like I said, we’ve, there’s an Internet café close by, and I enjoy volunteering every so often at [?? 46.56], you know, where we first met. I mean, I’ll pop in there every so often and help Elaine out. Not so much at the moment because I’m desperately trying to find a job, but that’s by the by, but yes, so no, I do quite like the area, I have to admit, yes.
Interviewer: Great. Okay, thank you very much Helen. So maybe you have anything to add or to emphasise before we finish?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: Okay, great. Thank you.