Interviewer: For the one hour interview…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: About the Diary Study, so is that ok, are you happy for me to…?
Participant: Yeah, I’ll just let you know though, I do have, the kiddies are around so there might be a few interruptions but we’ll see how we go.
Interviewer: Oh right, ok, so thank you very much for taking part in the Diary Study.
Participant: That’s ok.
Interviewer: So we just have one hour to speak about your experiences of the Diary Study, and then just to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: There are no good or bad answers, we’re just interested in your sort of honest points of view about your daily routine.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: Yeah, there are no right or wrong answers. So yeah, do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: Only that I was a little bit worried that I was, my diary entries were getting a little bit mundane and kind of, there wasn’t really anything exciting to put in it. It was like, every day it was like, oh, not really, not a massive amount to put down, that’s all I’ll say.
Interviewer: Oh ok, well we are sort of interested in people’s, you know, daily routines, sort of as they come, so not being exciting is, that’s fine, I wouldn’t worry about it.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: Ok, so could you tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: The first time I did it I found it, well, it took me longest to do it the first time, but each time I did it, it got quicker and quicker each time. Obviously it took longer if I’d been on a shopping trip, it seemed to take a lot longer then because there’s lots more things to fill out and I know it was voluntary, you could photograph your receipts and stuff like that. So it just took a bit longer if you went shopping, but yeah, overall, yeah, it was quite easy to do.
Interviewer: Ok, and did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: No, not really, no.
Interviewer: Ok, and could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Typical food shopping trip?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: The main shop we tend to do is on a Friday now. We used to go to Tesco, but we’ve since changed to Aldi, largely because Aldi’s opened up not far from us now. What sort of things would you like to know about a typical shopping trip? Things we buy or?
Interviewer: So, how often you go shopping, so once a week I guess then, at Aldi. Do you do like top up shops in between?
Participant: Say that again, sorry.
Interviewer: Do you do top up shops in between? So like if you run out of milk or…
Participant: I tend to get most things from Aldi on a Friday. Occasionally there could be the odd time when you might need to pop round to the local Tesco Express if we’ve, I don’t know, run short on milk or something like that, but it’s very rare. The only think I don’t tend to get from Aldi is a lot of the toiletries, I tend to pop into Asda and get those on a Friday as well when I finish work.
Interviewer: Hm, so is there any reason why you like shopping at Aldi then? Did you say because it was bigger than Tesco, was it?
Participant: A lot of it is price wise, I noticed that you can get more for your money, the quality’s pretty good, most of the stuff you can buy, meat and stuff, is British made. Yeah, it’s good quality stuff. Having noticed, if you did the equal shop at Tesco, it would cost you a lot more to get some of the items you do find you get at Aldi.
Interviewer: Hm, and do you plan your food shopping? So do you take a list with you?
Participant: We try to, it doesn’t always work out. We try very hard to draw up a list during the week, so when it comes to Friday we’ve got a list to go with and I take it with me. If I forget or we don’t get chance to do a list, I tend to text the Mrs and she fills me in on what we could possibly need in the shopping.
Interviewer: Oh ok, so when you’re choosing what food to buy, what is more and less important to you when you’re sort of deciding what to buy?
Participant: What is more what, sorry?
Interviewer: So what is more important and then what is less important?
Participant: Obviously we’ve got, we’ve got three cats, so cat food’s quite important.
Interviewer: Sorry, I meant, so say your kind of, I don’t know, you’ve picked up an item and you’re deciding whether you want to buy it or not, what like, so for example, if you would say, are the prices like important? So maybe you don’t want to buy one thing because it’s too expensive, or?
Participant: It depends what it is, all that depends on what the item is. Obviously we do have to, you know, be careful, and price is important, but also in some cases, I mean certain foods you can go for the cheaper option, but there are some you just can’t because it just doesn’t taste the same or it’s not quite as nice.
Interviewer: Hm, so then taste is quite important?
Participant: Yeah, taste is quite important, and obviously with two kiddies as well, I mean you can go cheaper on certain things but I don’t like it, and as well I can say that with cat food as well. Our cats don’t tend to eat the cheaper food, they just won’t eat it, it’s frustrating. You think, oh, you’ve got yourself a bargain, you get some cheaper food from Aldi, and you put it down in front of them and they just sit and look at you as if, you eat it, [laughs], they won’t touch it.
Interviewer: Ok, fussy cats [laughs].
Participant: Very fussy cats.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how do you normally travel to the, well, to Aldi then?
Participant: I tend to, and even though it’s not far from where we live, it is easier to take the car round, and I tend to take the… I’m already in the car anyway because I finish work quite early on a Friday, so it’s just carry on the journey down into Aldi and then do the shopping.
Interviewer: Hm, so do you, do you tend to go shopping by yourself then?
Participant: Mostly, yeah, there are rare occasions when, if Sarah, my partner’s working from home, sometimes she’ll come with me and we’ll do shopping together, but most weekends it will be me that goes out.
Interviewer: And how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: With two kiddies that’s just a… I wouldn’t say a massive amount goes to waste but obviously they eat what they want, and then what’s left mostly tends to go in the waste bin. I wouldn’t say a massive amount though really.
Interviewer: Ok, could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: Words that come to my mind? At the minute the first word that comes into my mind at the minute is knowing what’s coming up, is cost, it’s going to cost five pence soon to have a plastic bag, that’s going to be introduced very soon.
Interviewer: Do you have anymore, anything else?
Participant: No, I think that’s it, that’s the main one that’s coming into my head at the minute. I know it’s not great for the environment to use them, and we should all really use reusable bags because it’s better for the environment.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yeah, I do actually, yeah, I remember going shopping with the parents all them years ago and they, the plastic bags [?? 9.12], I do remember the shopping being packed in the plastic bags and the whole sort of, everyone had gone plastic bag mad really.
Interviewer: [Laughs] Ok, so when you go shopping, what types of bags or containers do you use to pack your shopping into?
Participant: Because we go to Aldi now we do have some of the, they call them the bags, is it bags for life?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: We take those down, put them in the boot, we make sure they’re in the boot of the car and then obviously at Aldi you fill your trolley up, and then wheel it round to the boot of your car and then just load up your reusable bags, and away you go.
Interviewer: Oh ok, so you actually take the shopping to your car with, not in bags, and then you put them in the bags in the boot of your car?
Participant: Yeah, because at Aldi they already charge you already for bags, and it seems pointless, there’s no point putting it in bags if you’ve already got reusable bags in the boot anyway to use. So yeah, so I don’t use the bags anyway.
Interviewer: Is there any, out of interest, is there any reason why you put them in your bags at your car rather than at the till?
Participant: Aldi’s got a policy where you don’t, they have the, they have to get the customers through quick, asap, so the idea is you’re supposed to load all your shopping on to the conveyor belt, and then it goes on to, straight from there through the cashier and into your trolley, and then you go over to a packing shelf and re-pack your shopping from there. Not a lot of people do it, which gets very annoying, it causes hold ups, and even though the cashier, the ladies there are like asking people nicely to move, say, “Look, you’re not supposed to pack it here,” they still continue to do it, but I just, for me, there’s no point in using the packing shelf, I just wheel it round to the car. As long as it’s not raining I’ll quite happily be outside in the car park and just take my shopping out the trolley into the bags.
Interviewer: Ok, and is it annoying because you feel bad for the cashier or because?
Participant: Yeah, I get annoyed for the cashier because it is, the rules are there and it’s a clear sign that says, you know, warning, asking customers nicely to use the packing shelf at the back of the store to pack the shopping, but the number of people who wheel the trolley down and they put the bags in the trolley, and as the cashier, well, she’s, the checkout girl is doing the shopping, they’re putting them into bags in the trolley, but they’re doing it so slowly. So she can’t do it so quick, and I’ve been reliably informed by somebody who used to work for Aldi that they are timed for how quick they get the shopping through. So they could possibly get into trouble, yeah, it’s certainly, it’s something I’ve noticed since I’ve been shopping at Aldi, even though the sign is there, there’s lots of people that just seem to think it’s, it doesn’t, it doesn’t, it doesn’t apply to them, they shall just, you know, do what they want, and it is annoying.
Interviewer: Ok, I wonder if it’s the same in Lidl, I’ve noticed they’re really quick putting things through the checkout.
Participant: Pass, I don’t know, I’ve only ever been into Lidl a couple of times and they weren’t really sort of taking much notice.
Interviewer: Yeah, ok, I just wondered [both laugh], because I don’t want to be one of those people now that’s holding people up!
Participant: If you go into Aldi, Emily, if you go into Aldi, get your shopping into your trolley and over to the packing shelf or to your car. Don’t stand there and try and pack it, you’ll just upset the person waiting [laughs].
Interviewer: Well if I ever go to Aldo I’ll bear that in mind, I know now.
Participant: You do [laughs].
Interviewer: Ok, so you bags for life in the boot of your car.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you do that automatically, is it part of your usual routine?
Participant: Yeah, it’s become routine now, you get to Thursday, Thursday night and as I go out to work, try in the morning, you take the bags with you, put them in the boot of the car, ready for later in the day when you’re going to do your weekly shop.
Interviewer: Ok, so when you say bags for life, by the way, do you mean the plastic ones or the canvas?
Participant: The sort of canvassy ones, but also the, they look like, yeah, the canvas ones, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, so why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Why do you think they’ve been given that name?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: Because they are intended to be bags for life. They are quite durable, but the amount of stuff that I can pack into them, I think they are, yeah, they would last a considerable amount of time. They’re probably bags for life, they last you for life if used properly.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you think that the bags sort of match their name?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, yeah, I think the way they’re made, I think they certainly, yeah, they seem good quality I would say, yeah, they match the name.
Interviewer: Ok. Do you have to plan to take your bags with you then, or are they just sort of always in the boot of your car already?
Participant: I have to remember to put them in, and even if I do forget, I still, would still go to Aldi if I’d forgotten the bags. I don’t buy bags in store, I’ll just load the boot up with everything lose and then drive round to the house and pop into the house and fetch the bags and just load it up from the boot.
Interviewer: Oh ok.
Participant: I always, always use them, so even if I do forget, it’s not a problem.
Interviewer: Yeah, ok. In your opinion then, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Not that important, not really. It’s just that it’s become a lazy habit for everyone hasn’t it really, shopping wise? You don’t, there are some things, it depends how many items you’ve got, you don’t really need a bag for everything. There are some shops you can go in where they automatically do your shopping, they just pick a bag up and put it in a bag when it’s probably only a couple of items, where you don’t need a bag, you could probably just carry it. If you’re going in to your car or you’re just going round where you live, just round the corner to the local Tesco Express, if they’re a couple of items that are easy to carry, you don’t need a bag, there’s no point putting it in a bag. Certain places you go, they just automatically put it in a plastic bag.
Interviewer: Yeah, if you’re buying like a drink or something and they put it in a plastic bag.
Participant: Yeah, it’s like it’s mandatory for them, they pick a bag up and they just do it.
Interviewer: Hm, yeah, so if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how would you find it?
Participant: For me, I don’t think it would be a problem because like I say, at Aldi I’m using the bags for life anyway. I don’t think it would be a problem, the only time I have to nip out anywhere else, round the corner, there’s a Tesco Express round the corner from us, it’s only for one or two items, so I don’t really need a plastic bag anyway, I think I’d be all right.
Interviewer: So you said you used to shop at Tesco but now you shop at Aldi?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Out of interest then, when you were shopping at Tesco, did you still do what you do now with the bags for life in the car?
Participant: We used to have the shopping delivered, and Tesco, I’m sure they do probably the same, Sainsbury’s is the same, they do give you the option when they deliver your shopping, do you want it in bags? So we used to select, no plastic bags.
Interviewer: No bags?
Participant: No bags.
Interviewer: Ok. So do you every reuse bags from supermarkets, so like the plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, we did reuse them, prior to getting the bags for life we used to use the plastic bags that we’d accumulated down the years, we used to take them, and now obviously we’ve got the better bags. So yeah, we used them, we used them before.
Interviewer: Did you ever use, or do you ever use them as bin liners?
Participant: Only very occasionally depending on what we’re doing. Sometimes when we’ve had parties in the house, birthday parties, and there’s lots of stuff to go in the bin, we’ve used a bin liner then, but very rare.
Interviewer: Ok, so do you know roughly how many sort of bags you have at home?
Participant: Plastic bags?
Interviewer: Plastic bags and the bags for life as well, yeah.
Participant: We have about three or four, I think it’s four bags for life, and we used to have quite a lot of plastic bags from years back, which gradually, we’ve managed to get rid of a lot of them now, so yeah, it’s probably four bags for life, and probably a handful of plastic bags.
Interviewer: So are you aware of what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Yeah, there’s, I’ve seen the notices when I’ve gone into Asda on a Friday. The checkout girls have been reminding everybody that, you know, it’s coming into force soon, they’re going to charge you 5p a bag, and it’s going to go to, I think it’s going to go to charity, I think, the 5p, so they said.
Interviewer: Is that what they said?
Participant: That’s what it said, the notice says if you do buy, purchase a bag, your 5p is going to go to a charity.
Interviewer: Ok, and was that sort of the first time you’d heard about it, in Asda?
Participant: Yeah, which was about three weeks ago, I was just going through my shopping and the checkout girl said, [?? 19.58], she says, “Take note, in a few weeks’ time,” she was telling somebody in front of me who was asking for bags, “Take note, in a few weeks’ time we’re going to charge you 5p for them.” Obviously there’s one or two signs up around there I’ve seen as well.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the charge?
Participant: I think it’s a good thing. I’m a bit curious about how much of it is going to go to charity though, I mean in one way I can see it being a good thing, and in another way I can see people, well each time I take a bag and it’s going to cost 5p, it’s going to charity, so they’ll probably feel as though they’re contributing, but I’m not surprised it’s come in.
Interviewer: Oh right, so are you saying that it, maybe donating money to charity is actually not such a good thing because people…?
Participant: No, I think it is a good thing but I think it really is a Catch-22 because plastic bags are a problem, but in some people’s minds, they might think, well, they don’t mind spending the 5p if they know that it’s going to charity, so they might feel as though they’re still doing a good cause, but the plastic bags are still being purchased. So I’m not entirely sure it’s going to solve the issue. I assume by charging 5p, the idea was to try and convince more people to go for the bags for life, if you buy one of them, that sort of takes away the 5p charge. When you weigh up, if you, 5p a bag, if you had like 4 or 5 bags of shopping every week, that for me really is, if they said, “Right, it’s a 5p charge,” and left it at that, but obviously there’ll be some people who are saying, because it’s going to go to charity, they might feel as though they’re contributing to a good cause so it doesn’t really matter. I’m not sure it’s going to work with that one.
Interviewer: Whereas if they said, “The money is going to go back into the company,” people would probably be annoyed.
Participant: People would probably say, “Oh, 5p, I’m not paying 5 pence a bag,” and they’d get more bags for life. It’s just my opinion, I mean what do I know about these things?
Interviewer: No, it’s interesting, I hadn’t thought about the charity in that way.
Participant: Well I’m not saying everybody thinks the same, but there will be a lot of people out there who think, well I’m contributing to charity, so.
Interviewer: No, yeah, it’s a good point, because you’re probably right, yeah, so yeah, that wouldn’t surprise me at all. So you know the plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: The main pluses?
Interviewer: Purposes.
Participant: Purposes?
Interviewer: Yeah, sorry.
Participant: Like I was just saying, I think the whole idea was to try and stop people, change people’s shopping habits and stop them from getting supermarket plastic bags, and purchasing more bags for life, but as we were just saying, I’m not entirely sure it’s going to work out the way they quite hoped. I mean there’ll be a bit of a grey area there because it’s just people’s make up, the way they are. Some people will think, well, I’m contributing to charity, so they’ll probably just carry on and won’t bother about the 5p charge a bag.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: There will be, a lot of people will be like, you know, turn round and say, “I’m not paying 5 pence a bag,” and will sort of adhere to it and probably get their bags for life or something like that, but I think there’ll be the majority that won’t because of it.
Interviewer: So in sort of, all in all, do you think that bag use will sort of reduce as a result of the charge? Or do you think because of the charity thing, nothing’s really going to change?
Participant: I think there might possibly be a slight, and I mean slight, reduction. I don’t think there will be such a big reduction as there would have been if they’d said, “Right, supermarkets are going to charge 5 pence a bag,” and there’s no mention that it would be going to charity, so it would he 5p, so 5p towards the supermarket’s profit. If they’re doing that, I think there’d have been a bigger reduction, but because of the charity mentioned, I don’t think there’ll be such a big reduction.
Interviewer: Yeah, I wonder if it’s only Asda where the money goes to charity, or if it’s in general?
Participant: You could be right, I mean I don’t know, I’ve not been into Tesco or Sainsbury’s or anywhere else, I don’t know how they’re going to work. All I know is Asda said that the 5p is going to go to charity.
Interviewer: It could almost potentially backfire and have people buying, oh, 5p to charity, oh well, we’ll get a couple of bags [laughs].
Participant: Exactly, yeah, people’s mind-sets.
Interviewer: Oh dear, yeah, it could completely backfire.
Participant: It could backfire massively on them.
Interviewer: So basically it all depends on…
Participant: I think, to be fair, I think I heard it on the radio the other day when I was going to work, I think it’s, I don’t think it’s Asda who are saying it’s going to charity, I think it’s by law, I think it’s going to be everywhere. If you buy a bag, spend 5p, it goes to charity, so I seem to recall hearing it on the radio. So I think, I think it’s everywhere, not just Asda, everywhere, if you spend 5 pence on a bag, it goes to charity, so that’s why I don’t think it was make such a big in road into the problem that they’re trying to eradicate, because it depends what people’s opinions are when it comes to charity. They’ll think, well 5 pence I’m giving to charity, so.
Interviewer: And do you think that the introduction of the charge will affect you?
Participant: Me?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: No, no, no, I don’t think, it won’t affect me at all because as I say, I shop at Aldi, we use the bags for life, so I don’t think it will affect me at all, and if I go anywhere, where I only have a couple of items, I’ll quite happily carry them.
Interviewer: Ok, do you think it will change your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, because I think our behaviour towards shopping has changed anyway, so I don’t think for us, it doesn’t really affect us at all, not really.
Interviewer: And do you think that the charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: Yeah, I think so. I think that what we’re doing here, we’re pretty good for the environment. We use, we’re using plastic bags, yeah, so I’d go with that, yeah.
Interviewer: How do you think it will make you more environmentally friendly?
Participant: How will it make us more environmentally friendly?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: Well, we’re not using the, we’re not using the bags, so there’s no bags going into landfill, that’s got to be a good thing.
Interviewer: Definitely, yeah, hm, and do you think that there’ll be any other changes after the introduction of the charge in your local area and in your country?
Participant: Like I say, you know, lots can depend on each individual. I think there might be, but I think it’s going to take time. I don’t think it will be a change overnight, a massive change because people’s shopping habits, people have been doing supermarket carrier bags for years. You pop into a shop, you need a few items, you haven’t got a bag, you need to carry them so what are you going to do? It’s important to carry on as normal I think, but I think there might be, over time, a change in the attitude, but I don’t think there’ll be a massive change to begin with.
Interviewer: And do you think there’ll be any other changes after the charge is brought in?
Participant: What sort of changes? Give an example.
Interviewer: Maybe, you know, another policy or something?
Participant: There possibly might be. I think they’ll wait to see how it pans out first with the 5p bag charge. I mean they might even think about increasing it from 5 pence to 10, to see if they can really sort of hit it home to people, look, you’ve got to stop having the bags, it’s one thing they might do.
Interviewer: Do you think that that will happen if the bag, if the charge isn’t very effective, or do you think it will happen anyway?
Participant: Well I think it’s something they might look at to encourage the charge, I wouldn’t be surprised. I’d be amazed if it stays 5p forever, I can see it going up. It’s like everything else, they start off at one rate and then eventually it just goes up, you’ll see it creep up to 6p and then 7, and then eventually you’ve got 10 pence a bag.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: No, no I don’t think it is at all, no, not at all, I don’t see how, I don’t see where there is any encouragement to reuse your bags.
Interviewer: So it’s just literally not even encouraged?
Participant: No, it’s not, I mean I said 20 minutes, half an hour ago, some places you can go to pick up a couple of items and the person who’s on the till just automatically picks a bag out and puts them in anyway, regardless of whether you wanted a bag or not, it’s just people’s habits. No, I don’t think there’s anything, there’s never anything that…
Interviewer: So it’s almost discouraged in a way then, the way they’re kind of like forcing the plastic bags on you?
Participant: Say that again, sorry.
Interviewer: Bag reuse is almost discouraged, you know, from what you’re saying, you only go in to get a couple of items and they’re sort of throwing bags at you.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think that kind of needs to be the, changed, that they should encourage bag re, reuse more?
Participant: They probably should try and encourage bag reuse, failing that, I mean in the supermarkets they’re probably going to, they’re probably going to push more of your bags for life than they would, reuse the plastic bag, because there’s a profit margin there. If they can, I mean they can charge, what is it, £1 for a bag?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: If they can, I can imagine the management of various supermarkets have had their little meetings of, “Oh well, we’ve got to champion the bags for life and make some profit on it.”
Interviewer: Hm, ok. When the charge does come into effect then in England, some types of bag and some types of shops, they won’t be affected. So for example, medium to small retailers and corner shops, they won’t have to charge for their bags by law.
Participant: Oh right, I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: Yeah, so I’m interested to know whether you think that that’s fair?
Participant: I can see why they would do it, because the volume that people are probably going in there to shop compared to a big supermarket, it’s not going to be as much is it? But saying that, it’s still, it’s a plastic bag isn’t it? It’s still, if you’re saying one rile for a supermarket, then it should be across the board probably.
Interviewer: So a bit of both, it’s kind of fair but it’s kind of wrong? [Laughs]
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I know what you’re saying, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, so how do you think the plastic bag charge will compare to other charges? So for example, the congestion charge?
Participant: Because it’s 5p, I don’t think people will bat an eyelid. If it had been any more, if they’d said, “Right, we’re going to charge you 20p a bag,” public outcry I think, but 5p, I don’t think people will bat an eyelid.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s comparable to the other charges or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think it is, I don’t think it comes anywhere near, to be fair. They’re significantly higher aren’t they, the congestion charge and stuff? People moaned about that to begin with, but now it’s just a way of life, they just get on with it.
Interviewer: Yeah, well it’s definitely more than 5p [laughs].
Participant: Yeah, it’s considerably more than 5p isn’t it?
Interviewer: So what if they were going to bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, how would you feel about that?
Participant: I wouldn’t be too happy with that one because there’s, as much as you, I mean them sort of things can go in the recycling can’t they? You do recycle the plastic bottles, most of them anyway, so I don’t think you can really put a charge on that because as long as you recycle it, you’re doing your bit, you don’t need to do any more than that. I think to charge people for it would just be, well, it would be an insult really because you’re doing your bit anyway, you’ve used your plastic bottle, you’ve put it in the recycling, but there isn’t anything else that you really need to do with it.
Interviewer: Hm, and what about the packaging on vegetables?
Participant: Yeah, that one’s a bit of a, yeah, I see your point with that one, that’s a bit of a grey area, that one. Yeah, that one they possibly might, possibly be able to put the charge on that one, because it’s no different really to a plastic supermarket bag, it’s just the same even though it’s smaller. So yeah, they’d probably have to put a charge on that one.
Interviewer: So what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Depends what, how much it’s going to charge in ten years’ time, I don’t think it will be 5p, I think it will be more than 5p, I can see it going up. It goes back to what we were talking about earlier, it depends on people’s attitude. The charity thing that’s mentioned, I don’t think it will be such a big change, I still think there will be people that will just carry on as normal, whereas if it would have been the other way round and they’d known that it’s going to be the supermarket’s profit, it would have been a bigger change.
Interviewer: Ok, do you save water at home?
Participant: Do we save water?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: In what, what means do you mean?
Interviewer: Like turning off taps?
Participant: Yeah, we do turn off taps, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you do anything else, using, I don’t know, water butts, short showers? I don’t know.
Participant: Short showers, yeah, I think we do, we don’t do too badly with that. We make sure that if the kids are brushing their teeth, turn the tap off and little things like that. We don’t have longish showers anyway, so yeah, I don’t think we do too badly.
Interviewer: Why do you save water?
Participant: Why do we save water?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: Again, it’s good for the environment isn’t it? And it’s cheaper as well, the more, the less water you use, it’s cheaper in your pocket, the more water you use, it costs you more, so.
Interviewer: What about energy?
Participant: Energy?
Interviewer: Yeah, sorry, do you save energy at home?
Participant: You mean switching lights off and things like that?
Interviewer: Yeah, things like a plug socket, I don’t know.
Participant: Yeah, if we’re, probably not, they’re probably not so good at switching things off at the sockets, I will admit that.
Participant: We don’t have lots of things, and we don’t have, we don’t have many things that have, that sit on standby. So the TV, you can turn off, it doesn’t sit at standby, the stereo doesn’t sit on standby or anything like that. If nobody’s in the room the lights are turned off, and stuff like that.
Interviewer: And why do you save energy?
Participant: Why?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Two main points again, one, it saves money you in your pocket and two, it’s better for the environment isn’t it, limited use?
Interviewer: And sort of, so turning things off, and also with the taps, saving water, is it habit, doing these things, do you do it automatically?
Participant: Yeah, it is automatic, you just do it. If you spot, I don’t know, daughter’s been in the bathroom and she’s come out and she’s left the light on, nobody’s in there, you turn it off, but you just do it by habit, just do it.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Give an example.
Interviewer: Like bottles, jam jars?
Participant: Yeah, occasionally, it depends what they’re going to be used for. We do use, sort of ice cream tubs have been used for lots of things, to store various food items in, yeah, so yeah, we have used.
Interviewer: And why, [laughs], why do you reuse things at home?
Participant: Well some of the things you can buy, even some of your biscuit tins, certainly around Christmas when there’s a lot of biscuit tins out, if you notice, a lot of them, some of them now, it actually says on the packaging, you know, reuse me, so it’s giving you a hint to reuse it and it gives you an example of what you could use it for.
Interviewer: Oh, right.
Participant: And some of them are, I’m not sure if some of them are microwave safe, I don’t know, yeah, they sort of give you a hint to reuse them for various things, something I’ve spotted [laughs].
Interviewer: Yeah, I’ve never seen that, ok.
Participant: Yeah, I can’t remember which tin of biscuits we got last year, or a couple of years ago, and it had written on the side of it, it said reuse me.
Interviewer: Hm, ok.
Participant: Same with a tin of sweets as well, sometimes they have on the side, you know, reuse me.
Interviewer: Reusing things at home then, is that a habit as well?
Participant: Yeah, it depends what, if it’s needed. Obviously if it’s not, a lot of it, if it’s recyclable it goes in the recycle bin, but if it’s something you really need, if you need an ice cream tub for something, to store packets of rice in or something like that, or I don’t know, stuff like that, it depends if it’s needed. If it’s not, it just goes in the recycle bin.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you ever pay like attention to the packaging of products in supermarkets? So when you’re doing like your food shop?
Participant: Yeah, so if, it depends, if I’m buying things based on the packaging do you mean?
Interviewer: Just sort of, is the packaging important to you?
Participant: I sometimes look at the packaging and think, you know, I’m paying more for the, is the money going more towards the packaging than what’s actually in it?
Interviewer: The, are you talking about the style or the amount, or?
Participant: The amount that’s in it.
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: Style doesn’t really, it doesn’t really affect me too much, not really. I’m more concerned, I’m more bothered about how much is in it, because supermarkets are a little bit naughty sometimes, they, they’ll charge you, you’ll be paying a certain amount for an item a considerable amount of times but then you’ll notice if you look closely, something that said 500 grams has suddenly got to 450 or 400, but you’re still paying the price you were paying before.
Interviewer: Oh ok.
Participant: So the price has stayed the same, but the amount inside the packaging is less, they’re a bit naughty when they do that, and it’s quite common they do that as well.
Interviewer: Do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yeah, we do.
Interviewer: What kind of things?
Participant: Anything sort of from cereal boxes to milk, plastic milk bottles, drinks bottles, anything, sort of cat boxes, the box that the cat food’s come in. If it’s recyclable, if it’s cardboard, if it’s plastic, if it can go in the bin, it goes in.
Interviewer: And is that a habit, recycling?
Participant: Yeah, just do it, it’s part of just, it’s something you just do now you get to, if you finish something, because we’ve got two bins you see, they’re separated off. So you’ve got recycling and you’ve got the waste, but you just automatically put it in the recycling if it’s recyclable.
Interviewer: And why do you recycle?
Participant: Because it’s good for the environment isn’t it? That’s the answer, you feel as though you’re doing your bit when you recycle.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: I drive every, well, at the minute I’m doing six days a week to work.
Interviewer: Oh wow, ok, busy then?
Participant: Yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: Do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I try to, I’ve got a diesel car for the purpose of trying to save on the fuel.
Interviewer: So is it more for the cost that you drive efficiently?
Participant: Yeah, to try and, the less I have to put in it, the better it is for me on the pocket, so that means trying to avoid harsh breaking and harsh acceleration and all that kind of stuff.
Interviewer: And do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yeah, if I have to go round to the shop I’ll walk, I won’t take the car. Most weekends I tend to take the kiddies for a walk and feed the ducks and that.
Interviewer: Yeah, so is it more for leisure than necessity?
Participant: Yeah, it can be leisure and it can also be if you need to go to the shops.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, yeah, ok, and do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Yeah, we do, yeah, we do like to look and see what… oh, that’s my phone giving me a hint that it’s going to die soon, so [laughs], it’s a cordless one.
Interviewer: What kinds of cleaning products?
Participant: I think it’s mostly you look at your washing detergent, stuff like that, most of them seem to be friendly to the environment now don’t they?
Interviewer: Hm, and how often do you buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: As I say, we don’t buy cleaning products every week so we’re looking at, what? I don’t know, every two months possibly.
Interviewer: So basically when you buy your cleaning products you would buy the eco-friendly ones?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you plan to buy the eco-friendly ones?
Participant: Say again, sorry.
Interviewer: Do you plan to buy the eco-friendly ones?
Participant: Yeah we do, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Why do you like using the eco-friendly ones?
Participant: Same again, it’s better for the environment isn’t it? You feel as though you’re doing your bit, it’s the whole point.
Interviewer: What about organic foods, do you buy organic food?
Participant: We’re probably not so good at that, probably because we tend to find that a lot of the organic food is expensive, which is a shame but you’ve got to go with price really and what you can afford unfortunately.
Interviewer: Ok, do you buy organic food at all?
Participant: I have done occasionally, I’ll just warn you Emily, this phone’s bleeping so I don’t know if it’s going to die, so.
Interviewer: Have you got another phone?
Participant: I’ve got a mobile, have you got my mobile number?
Interviewer: I have got it written down, yeah. Shall I, is it, do you know it off by heart?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is it 07788523831?
Participant: That’s the one.
Interviewer: I’ve forgotten where we were now, what were we…?
Participant: We was on about recycling stuff.
Interviewer: Recycling stuff. Oh, organic food.
Participant: Organic food, that was it.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy sustainable food, so, food that goes towards sustaining animal welfare, forests and fisheries?
Participant: I’ve not really seen much food that’s got that sort of, you know, mentions on the packet, you know, if you buy this it goes towards… I can’t say I’ve ever really noticed that.
Interviewer: Maybe kind of like fair trade?
Participant: Yea, no, I don’t really, no, I can’t say I’ve ever really noticed that so much. Probably that’s because the budget I’m shopping to, I don’t know, but.
Interviewer: Ok, so probably not then?
Participant: Sorry, my little lad’s talking to me [laughs].
Interviewer: That’s ok. Do you support environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: I don’t personally, no, but…
Participant: Sorry [laughs]. No, I don’t think, no, I’m not signed up for anything like that, but it doesn’t mean it’s doesn’t, you know, I don’t care or anything like that, I’m just not signed up for anything like that.
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we’ve just been talking about, the recycling, water, energy, have you, did you notice anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: Apart from the fact that we recycle a lot, yeah, I mean obviously I picked out, I picked out the every day sort of, the amount of stuff that was going into the recycling, I think yeah, we’re doing, we’re not doing too badly actually, a lot of stuff is going in the recycle bin and yeah, that was the big thing I picked out I think.
Interviewer: Ok, and what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Environmentally friendly behaviour? It means, I would say it’s somebody who recycles, who doesn’t buy plastic bags, and basically does everything you can to be environmentally friendly, that’s what it is to me.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m very concerned, yeah, I mean you should be, especially if it’s something very close to home that can affect you on a more personal level.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples?
Participant: If you learn, can learn that there’s going to be, I don’t know, there’s going to be a landfill appear somewhere close to you, or there’s going to be this fracking that’s being mentioned at the moment. Nobody really knows a lot about it, the government’s telling you, “Yes, it’s safe,” but there’s not really a lot of information out there. The other side is saying, “It’s not safe,” and there’s obviously people opposing it for a reason. Well there is, so it’s got to be… I’m not entirely sure it’s 100% safe, that they are telling everybody.
Interviewer: So kind of very current environmental issues?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think the environment is an important part of your identity and your life?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s important, I think it should be important to everybody because, yeah, you want to learn, from my side, you want to, as an adult it’s your responsibility to leave something for your kids, you know, [?? 52.00] that a little bit, you know, as they get older you want them to enjoy something, and most of the things you have.
Interviewer: So how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: It does concern me but like I say, one thing that’s, I think I picked out during the diary, I think we recycle more than what we put in the landfill, so I think, I don’t think we do too badly, I think we fare pretty well on that.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so social issues, economic issues and health, how important are environmental issues to you?
Participant: Oh, good question. Hm, shall I talk about them? I mean you always, I think it’s people’s nature, you’re always going to be, see other things as more important than the environment. It depends what it is, depends what the issue is, it really does depend what the issue is.
Interviewer: So would you say like as important, less important, or it literally just depends on the issue?
Participant: I think it’s as important, but I mean it’s human nature isn’t it? It’s something that’s going to affect you on the pocket more, that’s going to draw your attention more than probably is the saving the environment, or an environmental issue. It depends what it is, it really does depend on what it is. If it’s… yeah, it depends what it is.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: I won’t say I’m the most clued up person, but I mean I know enough, I know enough to, about what’s going on. You see things on the news, I try to watch the news quite a lot, listen to the news on the radio and stuff like that, read the posters.
Interviewer: Is that something that you think you’d like to maybe improve or not?
Participant: I think we can all improve can’t we? Well we can, we all can improve and want to be better. It’s all right recycling and doing this and doing that, but we can always be better.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment?
Participant: I think if you’re talking just recycling, I don’t think you need a lot of skills to recycle stuff, it’s just you get into a habit. Yeah, my partner’s just mentioned something, when it comes to recycling it would be better if there was a bit more information as to what can and cannot be recycled. Some of the packaging, it doesn’t say, or it’s not very clear. It maybe just says, contact your local recycling place. Well that’s not always easy, and there should be more information regarding what you can and cannot recycle in terms of packaging.
Interviewer: Yeah, on packaging, did you say?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, so you could literally just look at something and then…?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s lazy of them to say, contact your local recycling place.
Interviewer: Definitely, because realistically, are people going to do that?
Participant: No, of course they’re not. If they’re not sure, they’re just going to landfill it…
Interviewer: Yeah, when it will take, you know, two seconds to chuck it in the bin.
Participant: When it could be recycled, but you can’t, if it’s like ten ‘o clock at night and you’ve got something, and it’s whether it could go in the bin, you can’t contact a recycle place at ten ‘o clock at night, and then you go out in the morning, you go to work. So it just sits there and you forget about it, and the habit is, it will end up going in the landfill if you’re not sure.
Interviewer: So it’s mainly just information then?
Participant: Yeah, it should be, it’s lazy when they put on there I think, you know, contact your local… there should be more specific, yeah, it is or it isn’t.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly, or not? So sort of from the government, environmental organisations?
Participant: You don’t hear a lot do you, not really? I don’t think so. I mean round here, I don’t know what it’s like elsewhere in the country but the green bins that were for your garden waste, they started to charge for your green bins.
Interviewer: Charge?
Participant: We don’t, we decided not to, I think, £25 a year I think it was.
Interviewer: To have a green bin?
Participant: To have your green bin to put your garden waste, the Council charge you £25 a year to use and come and collect that green bin on a regular basis.
Interviewer: Oh wow.
Participant: So we decided we’re not going to spend £25, we’ve got a composter instead in the corner of the garden, we put everything, food waste that can be re, you know, can go in there, and garden waste all goes in there, and save yourself £25 a year.
Interviewer: With the £25 bin, is that a bin or compost as well? Is it recycle, do they recycle it or?
Participant: It’s, so the £25 charge is for your green bin, it doesn’t matter what you put in it, it’s just for the use of that green bin, the Council round here, Lincolnshire Council.
Interviewer: So it can be landfill or recyclable?
Participant: Well in your green bin you can put grass cuttings, garden waste…
Interviewer: But do they, they’re charging you £25 a year, but when they take away that bin, do they recycle it?
Participant: They’re charging £25 a year to the use of that bin and for them to empty it during the year, so it’s a one off payment of £25 and they will, that’s for the use of that bin, you cannot… they’ll know if you’ve spent the £25 or not, because they put a sticker on your bin to say that it’s been paid.
Interviewer: Oh ok, I was just curious whether…
Participant: You can’t be cheeky and put your bin out there and think, oh yeah, I haven’t paid but they’ll still empty it, because they won’t, they’ll look on the bin and they won’t touch it.
Interviewer: So all in all you feel like you don’t receive enough support from the government or…
Participant: No, I think that’s, I think that’s, I mean we’ve done it different, we got a composter, but there’ll be other people who probably wouldn’t do that sort of thing, and I don’t know what they’ll do with their garden waste, who knows? But certainly we… Sarah’s just telling me there’s a 20% take up in the Lincoln area for the green bin once they introduced the £25 charge, so that tells you something, most people won’t pay £25 a year to use a green bin, whereas before, when it, there wasn’t a charge, there was lots of green bins out on the street once a fortnight to be emptied.
Interviewer: So you don’t know whether, once, the contents is recycled or not?
Participant: In the green bins?
Interviewer: Yeah, I’d just be interested to know if they’re almost discouraging recycling by charging people, but if you don’t know then obviously…
Participant: I’ll ask Sarah, see if she knows.
Participant: No, sorry, again, it comes down to information, nobody tells you.
Interviewer: I know, I was just thinking that.
Participant: We all assume that yeah, we automatically assume it will be composted somewhere else but I don’t know. To be fair, I’ve never really looked into it, where it will go.
Interviewer: No, well why would you I suppose?
Interviewer: Ok, so I’ve only got a few more questions now, I’m aware that we’re sort of running out of time.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: So what do you think of the legislation and regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: Rubbish.
Interviewer: Oh ok, not good then?
Participant: [Laughs] It’s pretty poor, no, I don’t reckon it’s very good.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of why it’s not good?
Participant: The £25 for a green bin is one example.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, definitely.
Participant: I don’t think that, it’s not, it’s not encouraging people is it not really?
Interviewer: No, what should be done then do you think, more encouragement?
Participant: Take away the £25 charge and I don’t see why it can’t be funded elsewhere. I mean it’s a bin that’s emptied once a fortnight largely during the summer months, I would say, because how many people, not many people are going to use their green bin during the winter.
Interviewer: No, no, ok, anything else?
Participant: Sarah just said that they should put a charge on the black bin instead, the landfill one instead of the green bin, that would make people recycle more.
Interviewer: Well yeah, it would.
Participant: She’s got a point [laughs], she’s got a point.
Interviewer: [Laughs] So, taking away the £25 charge on the green bin, and possibly implementing a charge on the black bin instead.
Participant: Possible, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, yeah, I think so, like I say, we do our bit for the recycling. I know it’s not probably great because I drive a diesel car [laughs], but…
Interviewer: But you drive it efficiently.
Participant: I try to drive it efficiently, yeah. I’m called Captain Slow for a reason, so [both laugh].
Interviewer: Are there any of your environmental behaviours that you’re particularly happy with?
Participant: The recycling, I’m happy with that one, I think we…
Interviewer: Are there any… sorry.
Participant: I was going to say I think we’ve pretty much nailed it as a family when it comes to recycling.
Interviewer: Ok, that’s great, and are there any of your environmental behaviours that you’re not happy with, or not as happy with?
Participant: It depends what it is, depends what the issue is. I don’t know, I can’t comment on that because it depends, a lot depends on what the issue specifically is.
Interviewer: Ok, and would you like to change anything in your environmental behaviours, or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no, I think, I don’t think, I think I’ll quite happily stand up and say, “Yeah, I do my fair share, or we do our fair share,” so, I mean what we’re doing at the minute and the way we do it, I think, I think, I don’t think there’s many that can be better than what we are, so no, I don’t think I would change anything.
Interviewer: Ok, and what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: Litter, litter, graffiti, it’s very annoying and we get very annoyed when we take the kids out for a walk and there’s litter flying about the streets, kids, well there used to be a corner shop on the end of the street, it’s no longer there now, but they used to go into there, buy something and open the wrapper and just let it go, just drop it.
Interviewer: Oh my God, wow.
Participant: And then you get, you find certainly, you can find various things, some people have dumped a fridge on the street, mattress, beer bottles, cans, fast food packaging, it’s just, that’s the one thing that lets Lincoln down as a city I would say, the rubbish, the litter, it’s terrible in certain areas. It’s a lovely city, but litter, people with that attitude, just drop it, don’t care, and, the graffiti, we took our kids round to the local park a couple of weeks ago and it’s not great to see a swing and a slide that’s been grafittied with a marker pen.
Interviewer: Oh, yeah.
Participant: And beer cans have been strewn about and litter been thrown about and dog mess, it’s just, even though the Council’s put a sign on and said, CCTV in operation here, you quite clearly see there ain’t no CCTV there, that’s just a sign.
Participant: Well it’s true, because you can’t, if there was a CCTV camera there you’d spot it, there ain’t one there, so just putting a sign up isn’t a deterrent because the amount of litter and beer cans and stuff is a sign that it ain’t no deterrent, it hasn’t worked. And yeah, I mean we take the kiddies round there occasionally and it’s not nice to let them go down a slide that’s been grafittied in marker pen with all sorts of stuff written on it, and you’re just thankful that they’re too young to read it and understand what it is.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, that is sad, hm, ok, so that’s pretty much all the interview questions. Is there anything you want to add or emphasise?
Participant: Say that again.
Interviewer: So that’s sort of the end of the interview questions. Is there anything you wanted to add or emphasise?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, I think you’ve covered everything, I think. I’ve probably been a bit mundane with some of my answers, but [laughs].
Interviewer: Not at all.