Interviewer: So how did you find filling in the diary overall?
Participant: Well as, did I find it easy do you mean or…?
Interviewer: Yeah. Was it, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, very straightforward, yeah. I think the first time I filled it in I might have had a bit of a, well not a problem but I think I misread one of the questions in the beginning I, it said about recycling and I thought it meant recycling on a weekly basis as opposed to like I think what it was aiming at was a daily basis, what did I recycle on that particular day. But other than that I think I put a footnotes as well as my diary replies anyway about that.
Interviewer: Okay. And was there anything quite tedious to write down at all?
Participant: Anything what, tedious?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well not really. I mean there were some questions maybe they were a bit repetitive about recycling furniture which has got to be completed each day which, well as it happened I hadn’t done anything over the course of that diary but had I been you wouldn’t have been recycling furniture every day anyway. I appreciate that people might have done it on a different day but no, as a rule it was, no, it was pretty straightforward and it was okay. I guess it was a bit of a weird question but you needed answers so no, it was fine.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you about filling in the diary?
Participant: Surprise me?
Interviewer: Mm.
Participant: No. No, not really.
Interviewer: Okay. Could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: My typical what, food shopping trip?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: What do you mean sorry, what would I buy do you mean or how do I get there?
Interviewer: So how often, what shops you go to, how you get there?
Participant: I try to go as little as often to be quite honest because I find shopping an absolute chore so I try to limit the amount of times that I do go as you probably saw on my reply, my diary that I don’t go shopping a lot and if I do it’s, if I go once I try and get what I need for that one, you know, to see me through until my next time. And there’s some people will go to a shop every day if they can but I find it an absolute chore so I’ll try not to. I shop mainly, my main shop would be at Morrisons which is our largest supermarket here, it’s probably about, I don’t know, maybe 40 odd thousand square foot store, and then the smaller shops in the town like Iceland and Lidl and Co-op etc., which I, if I happen to be close to them and I need a top up then I, you know, like fresh products like milk for instance I’ll probably use them if I’m, if they’re convenient to me at the time. But would tend to be Morrisons. And another reason I use Morrisons is for their points awards scheme which is a good way of saving for Christmas where you amass points which is then converted to shopping vouchers, you know, which you review and you get petrol and your grocery shopping and it’s surprising, it soon mounts up over the course of twelve months how many points you can get and how much money you can get. I don’t shop a great deal if I can help it and, you know, I’ve probably got £30 in vouchers to spend as it is now so come Christmas I probably will have £35 or £40 in shopping vouchers by then. Morrisons is my main shop.
Interviewer: So when you say you try and do sort of one big shop, is that a month or a week?
Participant: I wouldn’t say per week but I would make a visit once on every, at least once every ten days.
Interviewer: Once every ten days? Okay.
Participant: Yeah, on average about once every ten days, yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you normally travel to Morrisons?
Participant: In my car.
Interviewer: In your car? And do you normally go by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Well I, no, I take my daughter with me usually. My daughter comes with me.
Interviewer: And do you have a way of coordinating who buys what?
Participant: Oh my daughter’s only 15 months.
Interviewer: Oh right! Okay.
Participant: If she points at something on the shelf and she starts creating, you know, in the trolley, yeah, no I mean I fill up what I feel we need, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. How much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: What goes to waste? Um, very, very little. Very little. I don’t tend to waste food at all. I mean I know statistically people buy food, they fill their fridge and half of it ends up in the bin because it goes out of date but yeah, no I, very, very little, I’ll be quite honest. I’m quite frugal when it comes to things like that.
Interviewer: Okay. Could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: Supermarket plastic bags? An absolute bane. I know people have got to have them but I personally don’t like because of the damage on the environment, well it’s not so bad now there’s a charge on them but with it being only 5p but, so you do see less of them in the hedgerows etc. But I totally agree with the cost on a carrier bag, people are so wasteful, you know, and people do, I mean I reuse mine here, I use bags for life and if I’ve got any carrier bags I just, I don’t just use them the once, they do get used quite a bit until they get wrecked, you know. So five words to describe carrier bags? Okay. I mean necessity [?? 07:19], um… Well environmentally damaging is two words but it’s a phrase I suppose if you want to use that one. Five words to… Mm, don’t want to just give you any answer, I’m trying to think of a five [?? 07:46]
Interviewer: If you can’t think of anymore then that’s fine, don’t worry?
Participant: Yeah, I’m struggling actually. I am struggling to think of anything else.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Well as it happened years ago I used to be a supermarket manager.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: Yeah. So I’m going back to ‘90s, I was a supermarket manager when everything was, when we just handed them out then willy-nilly, you know, people could just grab a handful if they wanted to. So yes, I do remember a point when, yes.
Interviewer: What types of bags or containers do you normally bring, do you normally use to pack your shopping in?
Participant: Okay. I usually take bags for life with me and if I, if I haven’t got enough bags I generally look to see if they’ve got any cardboard boxes around the place that I can put any extra groceries in to take home, you know, the boxes that all the fruits in the shop for instance have been emptied then I tend to use them when, if I need to, but I generally take enough bags with me to carry my shopping home.
Interviewer: So you bring the bags for life already with you you say?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And is that automatic?
Participant: Is it what, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you do that automatically?
Participant: Yeah, pretty much, yeah. If I’m planning a shopping trip I’ll make sure I’ve got the bags with me, yeah, I take them from the house, yeah, the bags for life.
Interviewer: Why do you think that bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Ooh well I would say it is around the time that that 5p charge was brought it, that’s when I seem to recall them sort of appearing and having that name, which would be how many years now we’ve been charging for bags? it’s been a few years I suppose. I don’t really recall them much before that but then it wouldn’t have been something that would have stood out because the carrier bags were still readily available, you know. So yeah, probably two, three years.
Interviewer: And do you think the bags for life matches their name?
Participant: Yeah, because they are for life. If they break in time which they will you can take them back to the shop they will just replace it with another one for you anyway free of charge. So the lifespan on them is for life then if you like.
Interviewer: And what kinds of bags for life is it that you reuse?
Participant: What do you mean sorry, what material?
Interviewer: Yeah. Is it like kind of like the plastic-y ones or the canvas?
Participant: Canvas ones I’ve got. Yeah, canvas ones.
Interviewer: And do you have to kind of plan to bring these with you or do you just always remember pretty much?
Participant: I, well I take them from the house but I must be honest I [?? 11:11] I do keep a couple in the car anyway so I’ve always got a couple in the car should I ever need any while I’m, you know, if I’m out somewhere and I suddenly remember “oh I need bread or milk” etc., I’ve always got bags in the car with me anyway, one or two bags, but the rest I keep in a cupboard at home and I do take them with me then if I’m going on a shopping trip.
Interviewer: So you have them at home and in your car?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Well I guess it is important, yeah, it is important I suppose if you forgot, you know, forget to take them, you’ve got to get your shopping home so yeah, is important.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, how would you think you’d find that?
Participant: Well it wouldn’t really be an inconvenience to me like I say because I always take a supply of bags for life, you know, I’ve got about seven or eight of them. So I mean it would be an inconvenience to some people who went shopping and then suddenly realised they didn’t have any way of carrying their groceries home I suppose if they were to disappear altogether, you know, would be quite inconvenient.
Interviewer: Okay. So you obviously reuse your bags for life to go shopping, do you reuse any other kind of bags like plastic bags?
Participant: Well if I ever have to buy, you know, like I say sometimes I’ve been caught and I haven’t had a bag with me for instance and I’ve used those 5p bags, you know, the cheap ones that they have on the till, I will reuse them and they won’t just go straight into the rubbish when I get home. I keep them for something or other, whether it’s to pack my little girls, I don’t know, clothing for instance, like seasonal clothes that wants putting away maybe or what else would I use those for? That’s one use I’d use them for. I mean I have planned uses for them but I don’t generally buy them so…
Interviewer: And do you ever use them as bin liners?
Participant: No, no I don’t.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you, so are you aware of what the plastic bag charge is then?
Participant: Yeah, the 5p charge isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you remember what context you heard about the charge like for the first time?
Participant: Do I remember what, sorry?
Interviewer: Where you sort of heard about the charge for the first time and what context it was in?
Participant: I think it was in, on the TV news, you know, I think that was the first place I heard about it.
Interviewer: And do you find its introduction surprising?
Participant: Sorry, what was that question again?
Interviewer: Sort of did you find it surprising when they introduced the charge?
Participant: Yeah, because I’ve been in total agreement with it for years before it came in and I always thought it would have been a good idea to do it. So I was pleased when they did introduce that.
Interviewer: And what do you think is good about the charge versus what is not so good?
Participant: Well I mean it’s cut down, I mean statistically I’ve seen it on the news that it’s cut down the number of bags that we waste if you like and it’s a 5p tax levy for environmental issues so it should go to a good cause as well, not going into the supermarket’s tills if you like, it’s a tax, so I think it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you know or do you remember how you heard about that and when?
Participant: I think that was on the news, there was a story about it a few months ago saying that they were going to introduce it and how it’s been successful in Wales. Yeah, so I knew about it, yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well it’s a tax for, to be spent hopefully, this is the idea and whether it’s actually happened I couldn’t tell you but it should be a tax and the money raised should be spent on environmental projects, on green issues, so I’m in total favour of that.
Interviewer: And do you think that the charge is kind of successful in doing that?
Participant: Yeah, so far I think it is, yes.
Interviewer: Okay. So did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affect you?
Participant: Well it affects everybody I would say at some stage, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think it affected your shopping bag use?
Participant: Well not me personally because I’ve always used, I’ve always used bag, you know, I’ve never bought, some people used to go shopping and would buy, and just take carrier bags on every trip but I’ve always taken my own anyway so it hasn’t affected me as much, no.
Interviewer: And what about your shopping behaviour, do you think that’s changed at all?
Participant: My shopping what, sorry?
Interviewer: Behaviour?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person since the introduction of the charge?
Participant: Yes, probably has actually. Yeah, it would be fair to say I have.
Interviewer: In what respect?
Participant: If you’re aware of the issues with bags, you know, and people go shopping and say they’ve spent for instance, uh, a family shop, let’s say they’ve spend £60, £70, it’s surprising how many people then are very, very reluctant to pay 5p for a bag. They do tend to take bags, I mean I see people in the queues at the supermarkets when I do have to go and nine times out of ten people around here are taking bags for life in, taking their own way of carrying the goods home. So I think it, yeah, it’s affected everybody. For the good, I’d say it’s for the good.
Interviewer: So did you, so is that sort of a change that you noticed in your local area then since the introduction of the charge?
Participant: Well there’s a lot less bags strewn around the place, I mean before the charge, you know, you’d see these bags on the side of the roads and just slumped here, there and everywhere, people really just used them as you said, as mentioned earlier as bin liners so they would just drop them off by public litter bins. It was unsightly. People don’t do is so much anymore, has cleaned up a lot of that.
Interviewer: So you’ve noticed less visible litter of these bags?
Participant: Oh definitely.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: I don’t know whether this is relevant to this survey but I, when they first introduced it it was a plastic carrier bag charge was how they described it originally and I did have a disagreement with, you know McDonald’s fast foods?
Interviewer: Mm.
Participant: I did have a disagreement with them when I went through the drive-thru, I ordered whatever, chips and a drink whatever and they put it in a bag within a paper bag and they said “oh that will be 5p” and I said “well why are you charging me 5p for that?” And he said “oh there’s a charge on carrier bags” and I said “well no, if it’s a carrier bag charge then the bag should have a handle on it to carry”, I was making a point, I wasn’t going to fall out over 5p on a paper bag but I tried to tell him that that bag is not classed as a carrier bag, it hasn’t got handles and another thing it’s made of paper, it’s not made of plastic because everybody used to refer to it as a plastic bag charge. And anyway they were quite adamant you have to pay 5p for that bag and I said “well no, I’m not going to on principle because it isn’t a plastic carrier bag, it’s a paper bag without a handle”. And it got to the point there was quite a queue of traffic behind me in the drive-thru and the manager of McDonald’s came up to me and said “look this carrier, you can just have the bloody bag” he said to me. I said “well it’s not a case of just going have the bag, what you’re saying is wrong, it’s not a plastic bag and it’s hasn’t got a handle so how can it be classed as a carrier bag?” I was that awkward with him [?? 20:07]
Interviewer: Well I think in Scotland you don’t have to pay for paper bags without handles?
Participant: No. I don’t think, I didn’t think you had to in Wales either to be honest but well they still charge them to this day anyway but I’m not sure if they’ve got handles on them now, so whether that was down to me I don’t know.
Interviewer: Okay. So what do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is delivered in and applied in your country?
Participant: How do I think it’s delivered and applied?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well it’s quite strictly applied, I mean I heard was not any shops just handing them out, you know, everybody did have to pay for them, you know, there’s no favouritism if someone’s a regular customer, they don’t just give them to them, everybody does have to pay. So no, total favour of it. We’re too wasteful anyway in this country and just probably without these plastic bags, I know the Co-op is, well I mentioned the Co-op because that is where I was a supermarket manager for, and years and years and years ago before environmental issues became such a priority and such a hot topic of news we used to, you know, we used to give carrier bags away but they were all biodegradable bags, you know, one of the first supermarket chains to do it but they never pushed the issue, you know, they never sold the fact they were biodegradable but in a way I suppose they were a bit before their time.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: No. No I don’t. It could be pushed more.
Interviewer: So do you think that should change then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: When the 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge might not apply.
Participant: Oh right.
Interviewer: Do you think that that’s right or not?
Participant: It depends what sort of shop I suppose and what sort of bag.
Interviewer: So corner shops, small shops won’t have to charge whereas larger shops will.
Participant: Oh no, I think it should be the same rule across the board. Well I don’t, I think everybody should, every store should charge for it.
Interviewer: And what do you think about, you know, clothes shops having to charge and things like that?
Participant: Well lots of clothes shops they use paper bags don’t they? Very few, I mean your places like Burtons I suppose they use plastic bags but lots of them use these paper bags which is emblazoned with their logo, you’re paying your 5p to advertise their business and they, you know, I suppose the supermarket they’ve got advertising as well but they’re plastic bags. Any plastic bags should be [?? 23:19]. If it’s paper well, you know, then I don’t, ooh I don’t think you, you know, if they took the 5p ruling away from paper bags then I, you know, I wouldn’t have a problem with that because it’s a product that will break down anyway, whereas takes years for plastic to break down so…
Interviewer: Okay. And how do you think that the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, so for example the congestion charge they have in busy cities?
Participant: Well I’ve never had, never witnessed congestion charge so I can’t, I wouldn’t be qualified to speak on that. I didn’t, I thought it was only London that had the congestion charge, I don’t, well I know in Wales, I don’t think any town or city has a congestion charge in Wales anyway.
Interviewer: What if they were to bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, how do you think you’d feel about that?
Participant: Um, right it’s wasteful to have it, they don’t need this, all this plastic packaging. I, mm, I don’t know, it’s a tricky one because it does affect people, you know, people have a limited budget so I think those people [?? 24:37] do you really want to charge them more for taking that packaging home? Well I wouldn’t be in favour of that to be honest.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Well I would imagine once it’s introduced in more countries there will be a gradual decrease in the number of bags being used which is a good thing. People are always going to want them and always going to need them so they’re always going to be there but even with people that use a 5p bag, if they got three, four uses out of it, it has been used a lot more than it would have been before the charge. So they’ll always be around because people will always need them and supermarkets will always have to provide them, unless they went down the route of what they use in America which are these big brown paper bags to carry their [?? 25:36], again wouldn’t have a problem with that even if [?? 25:39] charge, I wouldn’t have a problem with that.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you save water at home?
Participant: As much as possible. As much as I possibly can. My water bills are very, very low here. Watering the garden I use rainwater which goes into a water butt so I don’t need a hosepipe. The water for the watering can comes out of this water butt which is rainwater. I’ll give you an example if you like, my water bill for twelve months came in about £90, that’s how low it is. So I don’t waste water.
Interviewer: Do you have any other examples of how you save your water?
Participant: Well one of the questions on the diary was about turning the taps off, yes, I always do that, you know, when brushing our teeth and people will just leave the tap running, I never do, it always gets turned off. I shower more than I bath, which it’s a bit crazy really we’re installing a Jacuzzi because I never use, I always have a shower so I don’t really know why I bought the Jacuzzi but I did but [?? 27:03] [Laughter]
Interviewer: And why do you try and save water at home?
Participant: Cost. It’s on a meter, anything that goes down that plughole is costing me money so we count the cost.
Interviewer: And is it a habit for you when you do these things, so turning off the taps and using the water butt, or do you have to remember and plan to do it?
Participant: No. I do it naturally, it’s I’ve always done it, you know. Water in the kettle I think was another question, I only put enough water, boil enough in the kettle for myself, you know, if I’m making a cup of coffee I don’t half fill the kettle, I would make sure there’s enough water just one cup for me. So little things like that, you know.
Interviewer: Do you save energy at home?
Participant: Yes I do. It’s funny you should say that, we’ve had additional loft insulation put in. My, are you talking about heating now for instance?
Interviewer: Heating’s an example, yeah, just energy in general?
Participant: Fully double-glazed, I’ve got, installed this special glass into the windows which attracts the heating and doesn’t let the heat out at night [?? 28:21] back off the windows back into the house. I’ve just topped up my loft insulation so it’s very toasty here and the cavities of the house have been injected with the Rockwool so, you know, they’re, I don’t know any more I can do to economise as far as heating’s concerned.
Interviewer: What about kind of like electrics, plugs and the TV and things like that?
Participant: No, with having a little girl, my daughter, the plugs are all turned off anyway whenever appliances and, you know, even things like the microwave is turned off at the switch in the wall, everything, if we’re not using it it gets turned off at the wall, not a case of leaving it on standby, they are actually all turned off.
Interviewer: And is there a reason why you like to save your energy at home?
Participant: A lot of it again is down to cost, you know, anything that you can save, cut back on is a good thing, you know. I mean at the end of the day it’s something as well the government for instance want people to be more green, it’s the only way people actually buy-in to the ideas when it actually costs them themselves. It’s the only way, I mean you could advertise and put public awareness films out there, until it actually costs the person in their pocket they don’t really buy-in to the idea I don’t think.
Interviewer: And do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Like? [No immediate response] Like what do you mean?
Interviewer: Like bottles or jars, things like that?
Participant: They go to recycling. I recycle those, plastic bottles, I don’t tend to use them, no. Glass, no, that’s just all recycled. I wouldn’t have a reason or use for them to be used again.
Interviewer: And when you’re doing your food shop in Morrisons, do you ever pay attention to the packaging that the products are in?
Participant: No, I probably don’t actually. No I don’t.
Interviewer: So the packaging it’s not very important to you?
Participant: No. I do tend to buy if, you know, I tend to buy packaged fruit for instance as opposed to loose flow for the simple reason, this is going to, my mother thinks I’m crazy for this, I don’t know who’s touched it! [Laughs] You know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t know how, people pick apples up, change their mind, put them back, how clean are their hands, you know? So I know you wash them when you get home but I don’t know, I’ve got this thing I can’t eat it, if anything’s open I, and people sneeze around it, you know, I buy packaged stuff on this, for those reasons really.
Interviewer: So it’s more of a hygiene thing?
Participant: Yeah, completely, definitely.
Interviewer: So you mentioned recycling your household waste, so jars and glass you mentioned, what other things do you recycle?
Participant: I recycle nearly everything.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Yeah. Waste collection is only once a fortnight but recycling collections with local authority is every week but they do promote people to recycle. And I’ll be quite honest I, if it wasn’t for my daughter’s nappies they could probably collect my waste once a month because that’s how much I would fill, I don’t, you know, one black bag a month would be sufficient for me. I’m recycling everything.
Interviewer: Mm, okay.
Participant: The local authority are very good on recycling here, you know, you don’t even have to separate the waste, they do it all, you just put it all into one big bag and they collect that every Monday and there’s very little that they won’t take actually. Food waste, they’ll take that, that’s collected weekly and then that’s taken to their place and they turn that then into compost and then they sell that on then to gardeners, so no I must [?? 33:01]
Interviewer: And is that a habit your recycling?
Participant: Is it what, sorry?
Interviewer: A habit?
Participant: Yeah. Well I’ve got two bins, two swing bins, one is for household waste and one is for recycling and so I, it’s easy for me to separate my stuff, you know. Any paper, plastics, anything really, even with the plastic packaging, you mentioned about foods, you know, vegetables and fruit, you know, that comes in these small packets and that gets recycled in there. Yeah, so wasn’t for nappies then I’d probably, you know, I’d probably fill half a bag a month of household waste.
Interviewer: And how often do you drive?
Participant: Well I [sighs], over the course of a week I’d probably drive four days out of seven.
Interviewer: Do you ever save up your car trips or not?
Participant: Do I ever what, I beg your pardon?
Interviewer: Save up your car trips?
Participant: Save up?
Interviewer: Yeah. So like if you have, I don’t know, if you need to drive to a few different places but they’re nearby you’ll wait to do it in one go rather than going back and forth lots?
Participant: No, I don’t do that habit to be honest. If I need to go somewhere I just go, I don’t try and, no, I don’t. But then [?? 34:24] isn’t a great deal anyway, I might only drive, oh I don’t know, something, 60 miles a week, 70 miles a week perhaps.
Interviewer: And do you…
Participant: I live [?? 34:36] to the town centre so I generally go there during the week which is about 35 mile round trip but that’s about it really. So my mileage is quite low, you know.
Interviewer: Do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I do. I’ve got a computer on my car which tells me how many miles per gallon I’m consuming and what my average is and it goes up, you know, very fuel economical car anyway, it does on average 64 miles to the gallon and there is this clock on it which is actually what tells me then if my driving’s bad how many miles per gallon I’ll be getting if I continue [?? 35:17] so I, and it goes up to 99 on this digital display on my car and my aim is always to try and keep it at 99 which is very difficult when you’ve got cornering and that but I always try to, yeah, it’s a six speed gear box so yeah, I do try and drive economically if I can.
Interviewer: And do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: I don’t cycle, no, but walking, yes, if I need to, you know. Might walk about oh, I don’t know, 7, 8 miles a week perhaps with my daughter with the pushchair.
Interviewer: Oh okay. How often is that?
Participant: Well weather dependent really. I mean it’s a nice sunny day up here in Aberystwyth today so we’ll probably take her out for a walk this afternoon along the seafront.
Interviewer: Aw.
Participant: That’s the plan for today.
Interviewer: So it’s sort of for leisure…
Participant: Oh yeah.
Interviewer: …rather than, you know, you need to be somewhere?
Participant: Well it’s a leisure activity, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: No, I don’t. For the simple reason I have bought them in the past and I don’t like them as good as to be honest. No, I don’t tend to buy them.
Interviewer: So that’s sort of put you off buying them again?
Participant: Yeah. They might have changed now, over the years they’ve developed the product but I bought them when they first came out and they weren’t as good so I haven’t bought them since.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy organic food?
Participant: Yes I do, yeah.
Interviewer: Is there a reason why you buy organic food?
Participant: Well I have it in my head that it’s healthier to be honest, um, yeah that’s probably, I mean I don’t purposely go out and buy organic, if I go to the shop and it’s on, if it’s on promotion and it’s, you know, say with a vegetable for instance and they’re on promotion and they’re the same price as non-organic food I’ll always buy the organic first. Organic cereals for my daughter, yeah, that’s about it really. We’re not, I would say 5% percent of the time it’s organic, 95% it’s not organic, so yeah.
Interviewer: And what about sustainable food so kind of…?
Participant: Sustainable?
Interviewer: Yeah. So foods that go towards protecting animal welfare or forests?
Participant: No, not really. It’s not something that I would purposely, you know, go out because of that, no.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why or just…?
Participant: It’s not something I’ve really thought about to be honest with you. No, it’s not something I’ve really thought about.
Interviewer: And do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: Let me see. I’ve, no, in fairness I don’t, no.
Interviewer: Okay. And all of these behaviours we’ve just talked about so saving water, energy, reusing things, driving, walking, all of that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary filling out period?
Participant: No, not really. No, it wouldn’t be fair to say I have, no.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well anything cuts down on your carbon footprint, anything that’s well environmentally friendly I suppose, you know, how would I quantify it? I’m quite eco-friendly I think anyway, I try to be as much as possible, it’s not always practical on a day-to-day basis I’ll be quite honest but I try to be if I can be at all.
Interviewer: How concerned if at all are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Yeah, I am quite concerned about that in all fairness I must say, I am. I think people should be more environmentally aware of environmental issues to be honest. A lot of people are very blasé about it and they should be more switched on if you like and realise the damage that certain practices are having on the environment.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of the specific types of issues that you’re concerned about?
Participant: Deforestation, that’s quite a concern. Yeah.
Interviewer: And is the environment an important part of your self-identity in your life?
Participant: Well I mean I don’t think about, I just get on with it, you know.
Interviewer: Mm, yeah.
Participant: [?? 40:40] on a daily basis, it’s part of your lifestyle, you know, it’s just something you have to adopt and you do. I mean I don’t actively promote it, it’s just, I mean in time people just get used to it don’t they?
Interviewer: So it is a part of your lifestyle you think?
Participant: Yeah. It is, yeah.
Interviewer: How concerned if at all are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I mean I try to cut back as much as possible and like I said to you if it wasn’t for nappies then probably one black bag a month would be enough for me. I mean I recycle as much as possible.
Interviewer: Are you concerned at all about recyclable waste?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so social, economic and health issues, how important if at all are environmental issues to you?
Participant: Oh yeah, I think everybody should be aware of them and concerned about them, yeah.
Interviewer: So how do you think environmental issues compare to other issues?
Participant: How do I what, sorry?
Interviewer: How would you compare environmental issues to other issues like the economy?
Participant: Oh I see what you mean. Environmental services, yeah, well I mean it’s, well it’s on a par with any other issues like that really.
Interviewer: So kind of equally as important?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay. So do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m pretty aware of them, of a lot of issues, environmental issues, yeah, I take quite an interest in it so, you know, yeah I am quite aware of it, yeah.
Interviewer: Is there anything that you think you don’t know enough about or…?
Participant: Well information is there if you want it, you know, via the internet, you know, so that if people are really interested in it they can glean any information they want from the internet.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment?
Participant: No, I haven’t personally, only what I’m already doing with recycling but no, not really, I’m not, no I don’t, no.
Interviewer: Would you like to improve these?
Participant: Well I wouldn’t have the time to be honest. So no is the answer to that question.
Interviewer: Okay. Why don’t you feel like, or why do you feel like you don’t have the skills?
Participant: Why don’t I feel like I have them or need them did you say?
Interviewer: You said that you don’t feel like you have the skills to do things for the environment, so why do you feel like you don’t have the skills?
Participant: Well 1) I haven’t got the time with a daughter, I’ve never done it in the past so I’d have to have instruction, I couldn’t just take it upon myself to do something. I do my bit with recycling. No I, that’s basically I’ve never [?? 44:04] that sort of environment so…
Interviewer: Okay. Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yes I am, yeah.
Interviewer: Which of your environmental behaviours are you particularly happy with?
Participant: Recycling, um… Water usage, economising on fuel, yeah.
Interviewer: And are there any behaviours in this area that you’re not so happy with?
Participant: No, not really… Not really, no.
Interviewer: What are the main problems if any in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Sorry [?? 45:04] the line broke then?
Interviewer: What are the main problems if any in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Main problems? The environmental issues do you mean?
Interviewer: Just problems in your general neighbourhood so vandalism, antisocial behaviour?
Participant: No, never have issues here to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay. Litter and anything like that?
Participant: Is there what, sorry?
Interviewer: What about litter?
Participant: No. No, not where I live. They don’t even keep police here, that’s how low crime it is. We don’t, no, I mean there are parts of the town that have got issues, there’s parts of the town, no it’s, there’s no graffiti, there’s not a problem with litter, there’s no crime, no. It sounds utopia doesn’t it? Sounds idyllic! [Laughs]
Interviewer: So is there anything that you want to sort of add to or emphasise that we’ve talked about so far?
Participant: Not really. I think you’ve covered everything there.
Interviewer: Okay.