Interviewer: Thank you very much for taking part in the diary study, so…
Participant: That’s fine, no worries.
Interviewer: So today we just have an hour to speak about your experiences of the diary study and just to discuss in a bit more detail some of the questions that we did touch on in the diary, so yeah, just, yeah that’s it basically. There are no good or bad answers, we just want to know about your daily routine and like your honest points of view, so do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: No, no not at all, it’s quite interesting, it made me realise how much I ate at work and not in the house.
Interviewer: Okay, so could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It was easy to do yeah, it’s straightforward, not a problem.
Interviewer: Okay, was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: No, because it was quite straightforward, the questions and everything.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you?
Participant: I don’t think so, I don’t recall thinking, obviously in Scotland we have to pay for the bags anyways so I know it’s a general survey for everyone, so.
Interviewer: Okay. Could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: I tend to go just as and when need it, I don’t really do a huge big shop, so I eat a lot at work so I just buy whenever I need it really.
Interviewer: What stores do you tend to go to to buy your food?
Participant: Mainly, the main store would be Tescos, and possibly Marks & Spencers as my second store.
Interviewer: Are those, like the Tesco is that quite a big one, or?
Participant: Yeah, it’s a huge Tescos, yes.
Interviewer: And the Marks & Spencers is…
Participant: It’s just a small one in the railway station.
Interviewer: Are there any particular reasons why you like to shop at Tesco and Marks & Spencers?
Participant: Just for the location because they’re easy to get to really, if I’m leaving work obviously Marks & Spencers is in the station and I’ve got time and it’s not a specific thing I’ll maybe just run in there and get it, or other words I’ll go to Tescos on the way home from work because I pass it in the car.
Interviewer: Yeah, I was going to ask you how you travelled to the shops as well, so would they both be by car?
Participant: By car, yeah, to Tescos.
Interviewer: And Marks & Spencers as well?
Participant: It’ll just be, I walk into Mark’s because I’ll just walk from work into the station and pick up what I need, and then I pick up the car at the station where I live, yeah.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, do you tend to go shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Yeah, on my own, I hate shopping with someone.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, do you ever bring like a shopping list with you?
Participant: I’ll maybe do a shopping list on my iPhone if I know there’s a few things to remember I’ll just pop to straight in there.
Interviewer: And do you know roughly how many times a week or month you go shopping for food?
Participant: Probably 2 or 3 times a week I would into Tescos on the way home.
Interviewer: How much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: Not a lot, I try and just buy what I need and use it up.
Interviewer: Please could to tell me in 5 words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Tedious, it’s a necessity to go food shopping.
Interviewer: It’s a necessity did you say?
Participant: Mhmm, it’s not a pleasurable activity, it’s just a necessity one, I don’t particularly enjoy food shopping. That’s not really 5 words, I don’t know how you can [?? 04:36]
Interviewer: That’s okay, so plastic bag, just kind of a necessity?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: What types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping, your food shopping?
Participant: I usually just put it in my handbag because it’s quite big, or if I’ve got, if I’m getting quite a lot I’ve got a sort of nylon bag I keep in the car and just use that.
Interviewer: A nylon bag did you say?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Are there any particular reasons why you use these bags?
Participant: I just hate the bags for life and the hessian bags, I hate them, I don’t like them.
Interviewer: What is it you don’t like about them?
Participant: The bags for life because they go all tatty once they’ve been used a few times, they just look dirty, and the hessian bags I just think, I think of old people when I think of them.
Interviewer: So is it a kind of an automatic thing that you just use your handbag and the nylon bag, you don’t plan…
Participant: Yeah, yeah, because it’s in the car, no, I leave it in the car so it’s always there.
Interviewer: And is that the same for big shops and smaller shops?
Participant: If it’s big shops and I knew I was going to need quite a few bags to be honest I’d probably just put it all in the trolley and take it out to the car and then out it into the car, I wouldn’t even be bothered if I had bags or not because I’d just put it in the boot of the car and then take it into the house.
Interviewer: Why do you think that bags for life have been given this name, do you think that…
Participant: So people don’t throw away so much plastic.
Interviewer: Do you think that bags for life matches the name, like the does the actual bag match bag for life?
Participant: No, I’d probably say like a canvas bag would be better than the plastic ones.
Interviewer: So you said you keep your nylon bag in the boot of your car, do you have any other bags that you store kind of at home or in your car?
Participant: I probably have an extra plastic bag in my handbag just for a spare.
Interviewer: So they’re like always on you basically?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: That‘s quite handy. In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it’s important to have it available because not everybody’s going to remember and you could get like a you know, an elderly person and they’re going to be harassed and stressed because they don’t have a bag and how are they going to get their shopping home, they might not have a car.
Interviewer: What if plastic bags completely disappeared from all stores, how would you find that?
Participant: It wouldn’t bother me at all but maybe like in the States they use paper bags quite a lot, maybe they’d start doing that, I don’t know.
Interviewer: What, instead of them disappearing?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse plastic bags bought in supermarkets?
Participant: Do I ever reuse, sorry?
Interviewer: Plastic bags bought in supermarkets?
Participant: In the beginning but now I think I’ve not got any left so, no.
Interviewer: When you were sort of reusing them could you remember what you reused them for?
Participant: I’d probably use them just for garbage or whatever.
Interviewer: As bin liners?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there any reason, can you remember why you used them for that?
Participant: At that point in time I had a different, a different bin so now I’ve got a different one the liners fit in better, so I think it was just for that reason, just for quickness.
Interviewer: So at the moment you think you don’t have any plastic bags at home then?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: You’ve kind of used them all, okay, so do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: It’s 5p per bag.
Interviewer: Yeah, single use plastic bags, can you remember what context you heard about it like for the first time, how you heard about it?
Participant: Yeah, there was advertisements on the radio and things and on the news, there was a lot of reporting about it because I think it was around about the same time, just after the referendum so everybody was kind of paying more attention to the news.
Interviewer: What do you think about the charge?
Participant: It’s been done before, they did it just in supermarkets before but I think it’ll, it’s not going to stop people using plastic bags, it’s only 5p but I think it’s a principle thing, they don’t buy them.
Interviewer: When you say you don’t think it’ll stop people, for 5p do you mean, 5p isn’t…
Participant: No, if they need a bag they’ll get a bag, yeah.
Interviewer: But if it were a higher amount of money then maybe it would?
Participant: Perhaps, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: No, because they had it before, I don’t know if you had it in England before but we had it before in supermarkets years ago.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay. What is good about the plastic bag charge do you think, and what is not so great?
Participant: It’s good because it’s stopping people just willy-nilly having lots of plastic bags and throwing them away and not thinking about the environment I guess. The bad thing is I think when you’re going for certain items like expensive things I think it’s a bit cheeky they’re asking somebody for 5p for a bag when they’ve spent hundreds of Pounds.
Interviewer: Yeah, if they’re already spending quite a lot of money?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: You did know that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How did you hear about that?
Participant: I think I heard it on the news perhaps, I’m not sure, or online maybe, I don’t know, I did hear about it somewhere.
Interviewer: I don’t suppose you can remember when?
Participant: Or maybe a customer…oh probably about a couple of months ago, at least.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Just to prevent people throwing so much plastic away.
Interviewer: And do you think that the plastic bag charge fulfils this aim?
Participant: I think from what I’ve heard it has made a difference, I think there’s not as much being used so I think it’s worked in that sense.
Interviewer: Did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affect you?
Participant: Sometimes like when I’m working because if people want you know, they’re buying things and you’re having to ask them for the 5p and they’ve spent quite a lot of money, but not really, not big time.
Interviewer: Oh do you work in a supermarket then?
Participant: No, no, no, no, no, I work in a salon but sometimes you need to give people bags for products and things.
Interviewer: Oh right, and you have to charge customers?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So it’s affected…
Participant: Because it’s everywhere, it’s not just the supermarkets in Scotland, it’s everywhere.
Interviewer: So it’s affected you in that now you have to charge other people?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s interesting, do you think it’s affected you in your shopping behaviours and your bag use and things like that?
Participant: It stopped me wasting so much plastic, now I just automatically use the one that’s in the car.
Interviewer: Was it kind of quick and easy to change your bag use in shops or was it, did it take a bit longer?
Participant: The only problem would be at the self-select till so where it says put your bag on the thing, and it’d beep and then you’d have to get somebody to help you, so that’s the only annoying thing.
Interviewer: Yeah, that is annoying, “unexpected item”.
Participant: Yeah, I get that so often though.
Interviewer: Yeah, and then you end up putting all your stuff on it and then…
Participant: It’d just be easier going to a normal checkout.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, I know what you mean, we’ve all been there. Okay, have you become a more environmentally friendly person after the plastic bag charge was introduced?
Participant: Probably not.
Interviewer: Did you notice any changes after the introduction of the charge, or not?
Participant: Just a few different people moaning to me about it but that was about it, and they had no reason to moan because there was enough media coverage on it so they knew what was going on.
Interviewer: Oh right, so people complaining at you because you were charging them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, did you notice any other changes in you know, for your country or for your local area?
Participant: I think, well I don’t really pay too much attention but I think they definitely said that there’s a reduction in the amount of plastic, so I suppose that’s good.
Interviewer: What do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is being delivered or applied in your country?
Participant: I think everybody’s kind of used to it now and we just don’t question it, we just know that it’s there and we think it’ll probably just go on for a while then it’ll change again.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s good, when the 5p charge comes into effect in England there’ll be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge won’t apply so…
Participant: It doesn’t apply to paper bags here either.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, I didn’t know that.
Participant: Paper bags or bags without handles, paper bags without handles that is it’s not charged.
Interviewer: Paper bags without handles?
Participant: Without handles, we don’t charge for, no.
Interviewer: Right, but what about paper bags with handles?
Participant: They charge, that doesn’t make sense does it?
Interviewer: I’ve never heard of that, so in effect you’re paying 5p for the handles?
Participant: Yup, it’s the handles.
Interviewer: Right, okay, so do you, right, in England then so smaller shops won’t have to charge for their bags whereas larger shops will, do you think that’s kind of fair?
Participant: I just think it should be the same all over, we are, this is where I don’t like it because we are all one country, it’s not, that doesn’t want to be separate so I don’t think anything should be separate but, it’s not just with bags, but anyway, I think it should be the same.
Interviewer: Oh right, I see, you feel like the rules for the plastic bag charge should be the same in Scotland and Wales and England?
Participant: It should be the same all over, yeah, all of the UK it should just be the same.
Interviewer: And do you think it should be the same for clothes shops and paper or biodegradable bags?
Participant: Yeah, I think if they want to charge for bags they should charge, everybody should be charged.
Interviewer: How do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, so for example the congestion charge?
Participant: Well it’s not as high so I suppose you don’t notice 5p much but congestion charges are ludicrous aren’t they, so.
Interviewer: Would you support the introduction of other charges such as a charge on plastic bottles and a charge on plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables?
Participant: Probably not, no, but years ago they used to charge for bottles and you took them back and you got a refund, so if they did something like that, yeah.
Interviewer: So you wouldn’t support the introduction of those?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. What do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: I’ve no idea, probably the government will have made more money out of it, that’s probably what will have happened.
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: I don’t particularly, we don’t have water charges so I suppose I don’t pay attention to my water.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: Ours is included in our Council Tax whereas I think yours is separate so again everybody should be the same, it’s easier.
Interviewer: What about energy, do you save energy at home?
Participant: Yeah, I tend to switch off lights and pull everything from the sockets.
Interviewer: What are your reasons for doing those things?
Participant: Just because you hear things about like mobile phone chargers going on fire, I just, I live on my own so I think safety, just be safe and then everything’s okay.
Interviewer: And is that a habit or do you have to…
Participant: No, it’s a habit, I’m a bit OCD so I turn everything off at the plug so all the plugs are facing the same way.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Now and again but not very often.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of things that you might reuse?
Participant: Just what I said on the survey, little jam jars for bringing jam to work.
Interviewer: Why do you reuse your jam jars?
Participant: Just because it’s a little mini one and I can just take what I need for the day to work and then clean it out and fill it up the next day, just to save buying it every day I guess, saves money.
Interviewer: Do you look at packaging in supermarkets?
Participant: Like to buy as little as possible or just to…I don’t, I know what I want, I just get it, I wouldn’t think…
Interviewer: So you don’t pay much attention to how it’s packaged?
Participant: No, mhmm.
Interviewer: So the packaging’s not very important to you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Just, the only thing I recycle really is paper or maybe plastic or cans.
Interviewer: Are there any reasons why you recycle these things?
Participant: Because they’ve changed our garbage bins and they’re a lot easier now than they used to be, Edinburgh Council have so many different bins for different things that it got too confusing.
Interviewer: And has this become a bit of a habit now or do you have to like consciously remember to do it?
Participant: No, no, so the paper it’s fine, I just put it in a separate bag then take it down into the, empty it into the garbage.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: And do you ever save up your car trips?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Are there any reasons why?
Participant: No, just if I’m going somewhere I’ll just go.
Interviewer: Okay, do you think that you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I’ve got stop-start technology on the car so it helps a little bit.
Interviewer: So that’s automatic then?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Sometimes I’ll walk but generally I’ll take the car.
Interviewer: Do you know how often that is that you’d…
Participant: Maybe once a week I would walk and the rest of the time I take the car.
Interviewer: Are there any reasons why you…
Participant: Just maybe if I’m just, normally I go along to my dad’s house, he’s only 5 minutes away literally and I’ll just.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What about organic food?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What about sustainable food that kind of like goes towards animal welfare or the forests?
Participant: No, maybe if I liked certain things but I don’t go out my way to do it.
Interviewer: Are there any reasons why you don’t buy any of these products?
Participant: No reason, probably just they’re more expensive.
Interviewer: Do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So these behaviours that we’ve just talked about, so you know, water, energy, reusing things, recycling, all of that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours whilst you’ve been filling out the diary?
Participant: I’ve probably been more aware of what I’m putting in the garbage, like making a conscious effort to put the right things in the right place.
Interviewer: Okay. What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Trying not to do things to destroy the planet.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples, or?
Participant: Maybe just trying to drive and not waste fuel so much, maybe.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: What does the environment mean to you?
Participant: My surroundings.
Interviewer: Referendum did you say?
Participant: My surroundings, sorry.
Interviewer: Oh, your surroundings?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So is it an important part of your identity would you say, or not really?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Are there any reasons why you don’t feel, the environment isn’t an important part of your life, or not really?
Participant: I do bits and pieces but I don’t really think about it that much to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, so you just sort of, it’s not really on your mind, so…
Participant: No, it should be perhaps, but no, that doesn’t sound too good.
Interviewer: There are no good or bad answers as I said, so how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I don’t think I create too much compared maybe other people, so I’m not too concerned.
Interviewer: What about recyclable waste versus non-recyclable waste?
Participant: I probably should recycle more but it’s probably just easier to put in the same garbage.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society how important would you say environmental issues are to you, so say compared to social and economic problems?
Participant: Probably they’d be bottom.
Interviewer: At the bottom?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is that something that you would like to improve or not really?
Participant: I probably listen a little bit to the news but I wouldn’t go out my way to find out more. Sometimes I will pay attention to things like wildlife and things more so.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: You do, okay, and do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: You do?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What do you think about the legislation and regulation of the environmental area in your country?
Participant: I don’t really know that much about it.
Interviewer: Are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yeah, but I’m sure I could improve.
Interviewer: Okay, so are there any of your environmental behaviours that you are particularly happy with?
Participant: Switching all my plugs off.
Interviewer: And are there any behaviours that you’re not so happy with?
Participant: Probably wasting more fuel.
Interviewer: And would you like to change anything in your environmental behaviours, or not?
Participant: Not really but I should maybe be more aware.
Interviewer: Okay, so what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: Nothing really.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s good.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so is there anything that we’ve talked about so far that you kind of want to add more to or emphasise?
Participant: No, no, everything’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay…