Interviewer: So could you tell me how you find the diary experience overall?
Participant: I found it a bit difficult to keep track of everything because I was living at home for some of it, and unbeknown to me, my parents would go out and buy stuff maybe for dinner, so that was difficult, and also because I was away for a little bit as well, so I went to Jorvic, and I, you might have got quite a few less kind of receipts from me because we were eating out quite a lot, so I felt that I couldn’t really provide an accurate portrayal of my day to day life if I’m quite honest. So I don’t know, in the end, if I get selected for phase two, it would be much more accurate as to how I live as a student. Apart from that it was fine [laughter].
Interviewer: How many days you were away for?
Participant: I was away from Saturday through til Thursday. The last two days really, but I just felt, hang on, was I…? No, it was the Friday through to the Sunday because we were actually travelling all day on the Friday and our first full day was on the Saturday, so Friday through to Sunday [?? 1.19] diary entry either, so yeah.
Interviewer: Right, so what was kind of difficult for you to write down if anything?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Was there anything difficult for you to write down, if anything?
Participant: I thought it was a bit repetitive when it said how do you know where to put your recycling because that’s normally the same for me pretty much every day, obviously apart from the last two days of the survey. So maybe if you were to do it again, to keep that as a question at the beginning and maybe every couple of days make sure it was constant. But apart from that, what was difficult was [recording breaks up] [?? 2.05]…
Interviewer: I’m sorry, the line is cutting a little bit, I couldn’t hear your voice.
Participant: Oh okay, I will move. Is that better there?
Interviewer: Hopefully yeah.
Participant: Yeah, so I found it a bit difficult to keep track of what every member of my household was doing, but I was trying to look in the bins at the end of each day to try and assess what was being recycled, [?? 2.26] newspapers was the consistent thing that was recycled every day. But my parents drink wine and stuff, so they normally get rid of that themselves, so I didn’t always look, I wasn’t always aware of how much in quantity was being recycled, so yeah.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you would like to add to the diary experience?
Participant: Maybe if you were to add a bit about perhaps garden waste because I know that’s another form of waste that’s recycled or composted. I don’t know apart from that, maybe ask also…
Interviewer: I’m not sure actually that we can change really the diary for the next phase because it was kind of set in this way and…
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: …yeah, so I’m not sure we can really take the suggestions onboard.
Participant: Oh okay, that’s fine. I just thought nothing else really.
Interviewer: Sure yeah. Right, so probably the next thing I wanted to ask you about is your food shopping trips. So if you could describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Well when I was in Newcastle it was normally I would look in the fridge to see, think about what meals we had to use, provide, and what the cats needed to eat because they, there are three of them so quite a lot of them, so we need to update that every few days as to how much food was in the house for them as well. I would never really write a list down, I would always kind of think in my head and just remember everything and then go to the shop, and I have to say it was surprising, I didn’t buy many impulse buys, perhaps because I had a set budget in my head as well, so I wanted to stick to that. But I would normally go to Asda predominantly because they have a price guarantee and I know that it’s got a reputation for being quite well, reasonably priced. If I was rushed for time, I would go to Sainsbury’s which is much closer to me, and it’s much easier to walk back from there with say, a couple of things. Other shopping I did was sometimes I would go for a browse in a wine shop that I work in at the bottom of my road, but that was more to have a chat with people rather than buy anything because I normally sit in and have a glass of wine because it’s more a kind of wine bar and you can take things out, but I never normally buy anything, it was more, that was more browsing experience. I don’t think… The only other shop I visited was M&S and I normally do that when I’m at home because there is more money that I’m allowed to spend because I’m given a budget by my parents and I know that they like the ready meals from there, so I go there especially to buy ready meals for them [recording skips] if they’re working, I was working and it would save me time and I know that they’re a better quality than other supermarkets, or they have a reputation for that I think from their adverts, and I wouldn’t say I visited any other retailers. They’re all quite far away. I mean I do personally quite like Lidl when I’m in Bristol, but there aren’t, I believe, as many branches up North where I live normally when I’m at home, so yeah, predominantly those three main, Asda, Sainsbury’s and Marks and Spencer’s, yeah.
Interviewer: If you could say again, you know, those that you typically use when you’re in your normal sort of routine when you [overspeaking 6.01]?
Participant: When I’m a student, yeah, I predominantly use online shopping and whoever sends us the vouchers really. So at the house we all shop together so I normally shop with Sainsbury’s because you can collect Nectar points with them and they also, most frequently send us the vouchers. So we get £10 off a week, for example, on a £60 shop which will obviously meet with four people buying a lot of stuff to make meals and other stuff across the week. Sometimes we shop with Tesco but less often because they’re just, I don’t think they have as much personality as a supermarket as Sainsbury’s does. So I’ve noticed quite recently just visiting my local Sainsbury’s shop when I’m in Bristol just to get a few things, they’ve got the little twist thing on to kind of add flavour and personality to your food, so that makes it more attractive as a supermarket for me and that’s why I’d go for them, and apart from that, there is a Costcutters up the road where we kind of buy the odd thing and I personally, I’m a huge fan of fruit and vegetables and exotic stuff like figs and mangoes and my local area, Gloucester Road, has a load of greengrocers which you can go locally and get say, maybe four mangoes for a pound, so it’s really well-priced. So I go there quite a lot to buy fruit and vegetables when I’m here. Apart from that, nothing else I don’t think.
Interviewer: And when you, you know, you mentioned that you do your main shop online at Sainsbury’s…
Participant: Mmm.
Interviewer: …and what kind of top up shops do you use normally?
Participant: There is also a local Sainsbury’s to me in Clifton Down which is about ten minutes’ walk, so we can go and buy milk or cheese or eggs just if we’re running low and bread or other stuff like that. If we’re really pushed for time, like milk, for example, when we’re having breakfast, there’s the Costcutters at the top of the road, you just go and buy a pint, but it’s normally more expensive, so we tend to avoid that place. The only thing about Costcutters [?? 8.12] more local, locally sourced products, so for example, you can get the Somerset dairy milk which you can, as a recent discovery, you can get West Country milk in Sainsbury’s but just make it a bit more attractive, but the kind of the main Somerset and obviously I live in Bristol, it does give it more kudos and kind of it makes it more attractive to buy a so, a kind of more locally-sounding product. So yeah, I normally go there if I’m feeling as if I can spend a bit more money because it is slightly more expensive to buy locally as opposed to more generic sounding products, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, no that’s great, and I can look for a couple of follow-up questions to that.
Participant: Mmm.
Interviewer: One is how often do you go to, to get a top up shopping during the week? How many times would you say you need to pop in, you know…?
Participant: As a household, I’d say two to three times. So if, for example, there were four of us in the house who make the meals together, so if, for example, we’re making a Bolognese and we want a special product like some Parmesan cheese, just to make it a bit nicer, someone might go to the shop, or some salad dressing, that’s been happening because we eat a lot of salad. So yeah, maybe quite a lot during the weekdays, not really at the weekends because sometimes we do get takeaways from Domino’s, they do quite a lot of student discounts, or sometimes we go out for brunch as a treat, at the local café just around the corner from us, so…
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned that you like to get locally grown things and sort of local produce…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …how would you sort of, I’m trying to, to formulate the question, why did you start doing it? You said it has some kind of connection with Bristol, so could you elaborate a little bit on this?
Participant: Well it’s, I love Bristol as a city and I think it’s, there’s some kind of, as opposed to Newcastle, my home town, it’s kind of, it’s known as kind of the larder of England I think sometimes the south west and I have visited Somerset and it’s amazing and like [?? 10.38] so it’s kind of like a personal knowledge of these things and you feel like you know that’s where it’s from if someone says Somerset because you’ve visited those areas, and I personally find it a bit tastier some of those products. So, for example, the milk tastes much nicer than Sainsbury’s own, so yeah, like a personal connection I’d say and possibly the taste factor is improved if you buy local stuff, and it’s just much fresher so, yeah.
Interviewer: That’s very interesting, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: How do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Normally we create like a, if we’re doing it online, we create a Facebook group and everyone kind of thinks of their meals, so we have to make five or six meals a week, in the evening, we just do dinner, and everyone works out what they’re going to make so there’s no clashes, and then just write the ingredients down and one person will do the shop depending on who the voucher’s been sent to because we’re all registered as Sainsbury’s or Tesco customers. So if anyone’s got a good deal we’ll just kind of go for that so it comes out the most reasonably priced, and we also communicate via WhatsApp if, for example, someone’s out and their, they can go to Sainsbury’s, they’re closer than us, and pick up some milk or something or just something that we’ve forgotten, if we’re cooking we can’t leave the house because we’re going to burn something. So yeah, I’d say social media’s quite important in communicating and how we decide lists really, even though we live in the same house, we still kind of find it easier to write everything down so nothing’s forgotten online, so…
Interviewer: So you basically share the meals altogether?
Participant: Yeah, so…
Interviewer: You share the things that you buy?
Participant: Mmm, so we, everyone kind of does an evening meal. We normally have maybe one or two spare meals a week where everyone can decide what they want individually, sometimes we get a takeaway or everyone would make their different things, and then for lunch or breakfast and breakfasts throughout the week, we would always buy like maybe one or two boxes of cereal and some bacon and eggs and always some bread for toasting, sandwiches and some sandwich meat, and just bulk it out with other stuff that we’d normally use for dinner, so lettuces and tomatoes are obviously like staples for us as well. Yeah, apart from that it’s, it’s not very conventional I don’t think for students to do it like this, they normally quite like doing it under their own steam…
Interviewer: Very trusting, yeah, I like it.
Participant: …yeah, so it works well because it’s, it normally works out about £15 to £20 a week per person, so that’s what, about £80 in total for our shopping, and obviously there’s, at the weekend, we might want to, I don’t know really, you might just want to buy yourself a sandwich or something to eat or just an extra ingredient to add to a meal, so you might add like maybe a couple more quid on, but normally it’s quite cheap, so yeah.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: I’d say predominantly cheapness. If I’m buying, so for example, just ingredients like chopped tomatoes, I always just go for the cheaper thing, as long as it’s got a ring pull because they’re hard to open otherwise, and if I, for example, I’ve got a voucher then I would be feeling a bit more kind of, as if we could splash the cash a bit more as a household, like so if we have a £10 voucher, we normally buy some Ben and Jerry’s or something for pudding, or maybe just a bit more bacon, for example, because we know everyone likes that. So yeah, we normally, depending on the voucher, we would spend more or less really. But as it’s so cheap anyway, we would, we’re quite lax really with what we buy, so [laughs] yeah, we would go, I would normally go for basics, I think other people might go for something, whichever just popped up on screen first because we, it’s, after who decides when to, who decides which person will do the shop, it’s really one person will just volunteer, so it just completely depends from week to week as to whether it’ll be basics or more high-end stuff. But in the grand scheme of things, I thought it just doesn’t really matter because we’re sharing it between four people anyway, yeah.
Interviewer: And when you go to do top up shop, I don’t know if you drive at all or not when you are in Bristol?
Participant: I can drive but I don’t have a car, but that might change because we have a new housemate this year who, our last housemate, we are a five-man house, but our last housemate didn’t get involved in the cooking together, but this housemate might and she does actually have a car. So it’s possible that we could possibly make visits to supermarkets like Asda in Bedminster which is across the river obviously, and maybe Lidl and stuff because apparently you can reach Lidl by train but it’s quite a hike. I mean the train station’s only five minutes away but then there’s another 10 minutes on the train and then lugging a load of shopping back is a bit difficult. So normally I’d walk if I’m quite honest for the top up shops because I’m normally in uni anyway, and it’s only about five minutes’ walk from where I am, so yeah, it’s fine.
Interviewer: That makes sense, yeah sure, and when you go for top up shopping, do you usually go on your own or with someone or kind of…?
Participant: I go mainly on my own because I don’t have the same course as the rest of my housemates, so we’re in, and the three of us art degree students, so we have limited time in uni anyway, so it’s, we all go quite independently and just again, communicate via What’s App as to what we need really, so yeah, that’s how it works.
Interviewer: The next thing I wanted to ask you is a little bit unusual. Could you tell me maybe something like five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: It doesn’t really work, charge [laughs], well okay, let me think about this quickly… Wasteful but also useful, because I know they’re single-use but I use them quite a lot to put a kind of liner bin in a waste paper bin, plentiful at the moment.
Interviewer: Plentiful?
Participant: Plentiful, at the moment, yeah I think they are, well I know, October is another word that sticks in my head because I know the 5th of October they will become 5p bags nationally. But yeah, I think possibly transient is a word as well because they’re not very good. In the long term they do snap and transient in the fact that soon we will have to kind of, they will become less in use and I think bags for life will replace them eventually. So I don’t know if that’s five words, sorry [laughter], I can’t think of another one.
Interviewer: No that’s fine, that’s fine, that’s good. And do you remember when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yeah, I used to go shopping with my dad quite a lot as a kid because I am very strange and I love going to Asda because I think it’s a very bargainous place, and I would always help him pack up and stuff, so when I was about five or six really. So at the checkouts, just finding it when we got the stuff through the till and put it in bags. That’s when I first knew about them, but since I got to uni, I’ve just found that we get a huge number of them because I wasn’t catered, well I was catered in first year so I had no need to really buy any shopping, but in second year, so last year, every time you order an online shop, you get more plastic bags and unless you opt out of that which you can do I think for Tesco, I’m not so sure for Sainsbury’s, so we have a huge number of plastic bags currently in our kitchen, but I am slowly getting through with to kind of line waste bins [?? 18.52] but not really, so I’ve known about them for a while as I say.
Interviewer: And what types of bags do you normally use when you go food shopping for, you know, obviously not online but you can also speak about the online shop, whether you order with bags, without bags and those you know, what kind of bags you use when you go physically shopping basically?
Participant: Online shopping we, with Tesco you get brown bags which are kind of, more kind of like a lighter cardboard, and you also get, from Sainsbury’s you’ll get the orange plastic bags. When I go for top up shops, I tend to, I have a rucksack with me which I normally have my laptop in when I’m in uni, so I just put the odd thing in there. If I can’t, for example, if it’s milk and it’s just going to cause condensation over electrics, then I will just get a plastic bag because I don’t want to cause any risk to any product in my bag already. So I don’t, because it’s a top up shop and it’s probably not going to be expected, I will not take bags with me other than the ones that I’m carrying my purse and other uni stuff in. So I don’t normally intend to take stuff with me.
Interviewer: And when you mentioned the brown bags from Tesco’s, is that how shopping is delivered at the moment?
Participant: Yeah as far as I know. Last time we got a shop was obviously like June, but I think we’ll probably be getting one this coming week, but they normally separate it into frozen and refrigerated items, and then also dry items, so it’s quite easy to put in the fridge or freezer when you get them. But they have, I think they’re more biodegradable or something rather than plastic bags, so Tesco’s seems to be better than Sainsbury’s to be honest. But I don’t really know and spend so much because I suppose in Newcastle and Bristol, there’s only very small branches of Tesco, so I tend to pay more notice when I actually go in to do the shopping personally. When I get it delivered, then I don’t really notice, apart from obviously because we’ve had it quite a few times now, how I’ve noticed, but I suppose if I had noticed before, I probably would’ve gone to Tesco more often because it is more environmentally friendly and probably Just as cheap as Sainsbury’s, but yeah, as it’s delivered online, I didn’t really notice [laughs].
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to take the free bags from the tills when you go, you know, and get bits and bobs?
Participant: It does. I mean we do self-service checkouts, so bags for life aren’t available in Sainsbury’s at the self-service checkouts in the branch I normally use, so I just take them because they’re readily available and I can’t often fit stuff in my rucksack, so that’s why I go the single-use because they’re right where the bagging area is and you obviously have to put the items down next to them in order for it to recognise that it’s gone through the til and the checkout. So, so if it’s kind of like a reflex to take a bag automatically because they’re so easy to take [laughs], so that’s…
Interviewer: Sure, and how many of those would you say you, you know, you have a week or a month maybe?
Participant: It depends. If I do my shopping online, I’d say we get more because they tend to pack things more loosely [recording skips] go to Sainsbury’s shopping, I will take maybe four or five bags if I was doing a large shop. I’d say we probably get maybe even double that if we go a shop delivered. It’s really, it’s a bit silly the amount of bags they use, so yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: And do you buy, does it happen if you buy bags for life at all, the plastic bags for life?
Participant: No, because I just think short-term and think oh, they cost too much not, rather than the environmental impact of it, the single-use bags have, so yeah.
Interviewer: And do you have, do you own any of those little foldable nylon bags, you know, that people sometimes carry in their bags?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: I don’t. I do have the, I do have them at home but not in Bristol, I’ve never bought them, [?? 23.37] so yeah.
Interviewer: Another type, another question that I wanted to ask about this is where do you store the bags and what do you do with them after you, you know, you bring them home or your shopping is delivered? What happens to them afterwards?
Interviewer: Hello? Hello?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: I think there was a line cut, yeah.
Participant: Sorry. Normally I would put them in my kitchen cupboards, just right next to the sink because I know that I can find them again when I need to put them in a waste paper basket. Sometimes when [recording skips] kind of take everyone out the bag and put it in the fridge if it’s easier or the cupboards, then we just put them in the corner and then that just kind of mounts up, so I do chuck out quite a lot of those ones.
Interviewer: How many do you think you currently have at home?
Participant: Currently, maybe 20 because I did have a bit of a clear out before I left for the summer, so it’s ridiculous because we never get through that many and there’s plenty round here. So as a result of the study, I think I probably would make sure that all my housemates and myself would tick the no bags option next time we get an online shop because you can just get it in the crates and transfer everything manually, individually to the fridge and freezer, so I’ll think about that instead.
Interviewer: And how do you use them? Maybe it was something that you were saying when…
Interviewer: Hello?
Participant: I’ve got…
Interviewer: Okay thank you very much, yeah. Yeah, so I was asking maybe that was when the line was cut, what do you do with the bags normally after you, in terms of reuse, how do you reuse them at all?
Participant: I just, normally I just use them to use, put them in waste paper bins in the bathrooms. I don’t really use them in any other way I suppose because they’re quite flimsy so they would just break if I tried to put anything, that I normally tie around in, and I would be worried that it would be a bit of a risk to kind of lose maybe [?? 25.47] that could slide through the plastic, so I don’t really use them for anything else.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to just get rid of them?
Participant: Yeah, because we don’t tend to, especially the Tesco bags which are the card, more cardboard ones, they aren’t, they’re not flexible enough to use in a waste paper bin, so we would just throw them out, and I note they can be recycled, so I haven’t thrown any out recently, but I probably will start recycling them soon, they’re just piling up in our cupboards, so they need to be got rid of soon, yeah.
Interviewer: But usually you put them in the general waste?
Participant: I haven’t actually, oh no, yes, when I have ones which have come through the door and they’re kind of ripped a little bit, I will just put them in the general waste because I think they can be recycled, I’m not really sure, yeah.
Interviewer: And in your opinion, how important it is to have plastic bags available in supermarkets?
Participant: To be honest, I think it’s just a [?? 26.53] and it’s not really necessary anymore because people are aware of the problems they cause, for example, for wildlife, if they get into trees, not trees, seas and stuff, they can get, obviously they can cause problems for the wildlife and the animals that live in those environments, and people are becoming more aware that they can buy a bag for life and it’s also becoming quite fashionable to buy, for example, the jute bags. I know that Lulu Guinness has done her own range for Sainsbury’s and they’ve also got the charitable ones, for example, Red Nose Day do their seasonal ones, as do Children in Need, so it’s a great way to fundraise, and also become more environmentally friendly to buy a bag for life as opposed to, or the jute bags as opposed to the single-use bags. So I don’t know necessarily really.
Interviewer: And what do you think if plastic bags completely disappeared from the supermarkets?
Participant: I think there would be a bit of an uproar because they’ve been there for so long. If they replace them with, I think it would be a step too far, I think you’d have to, individually they’d have to start maybe reducing it gradually, so maybe limit the number of plastic bags you’re allowed per shop and then go from there and just gradually cut it down rather than they could do it straight away, because people are caught on the hoof quite a lot and if they need kind of an instant solution to carry all of their stuff and, and yeah, I know the Daily Mail campaign to kind of introduce the bag charge has been quite shocking and successful judging by the October introduction of charges on plastic bags, but people are more interested in convenience at the moment, and I think to cut it off immediately and just cut off plastic bags at the checkout would be too much. But it could happen in the future, yeah.
Interviewer: And first of all, yeah, when have you heard about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: In the past two weeks I’ve been in the supermarket quite a lot because I’ve been living with my parents and making sure that my sister’s fed kind of regularly because she eats a hell of a lot, and then I went on holiday for a bit and we had to go and obviously stock up the house, so it’s quite obvious judging by Tesco’s have got signs by their checkouts, as do Sainsbury’s. I don’t [recording skips] in any other supermarkets, for example, I was in Marks and Spencer’s a couple of weeks ago, oh no two weeks ago, yeah, and there, it wasn’t visible there but definitely in Tesco and Sainsbury’s it has been and also, I think in Asda, but I’ve seen Tesco and Sainsbury’s more so over the last few weeks. So yeah, it’s more, it’s obvious at the checkouts now, there are signs up saying the 5th of October, so it’s etched into my mind.
Interviewer: And was that the first time that you heard about the charge or have you heard about it before?
Participant: I heard of the Daily Mail campaign a couple of years ago because it did have like the shopping front page stories of the poor animals kind of getting stuck in the plastic bags, and strangling them as well. So it’s been a long time coming I think, but I think also the law must have had to go through Parliament, so it’s gone a bit quiet for me and so to be honest, this is a bit of a shock, but then it’s kind of brought back what the cause of it was which was a couple of years ago to my mind. So yeah, I did know about it but it can’t have, until the charge came through finally after it had made, the bill had made its way through Parliament, I didn’t know anything about it.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this 5p charge personally?
Participant: I think it’s good. I think it will be annoying to start with because everyone, no one will remember, I won’t remember, I’m very forgetful. It is, perhaps it’s, I don’t think it’s enough, I think if it was maybe 20p or something, that would make a difference because people are quite savvy shoppers nowadays and 5p really isn’t going to make that indent. Maybe if you’ve got five plastic bags, that’s only 25p extra on your shopping and you’ll be like ah, fine. So I think it should be more. I think it’s good that they’ve started it, but maybe hike up the prices a little bit more, yeah, so…
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that such a charge is going to come into effect?
Participant: No, not really, not really having remembered the kind of media campaigns recently. I think it really caught the public’s imagination, it was running for a couple of weeks and I think that we are trying to become more environmentally friendly, as a country and also, in Bristol we are, 2015 is obviously Green Capital and we’re the first European, or first English nation, city to receive accolade. So yeah, I think it’s, I think it was coming, it was a long time coming really. I think yeah, it’s kind of just part of today’s society and things can only get more kind of conscious of the fact, of the environment and how to improve our attitude and our actions towards it. Yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: Fantastic, and what do you think is good about this charge and what is probably not as good, if anything?
Participant: I think it’s a good starting point, but like I said before, it’s not really going to make that much of an impact on maybe, I think, hmm… Even for students, I’m not really sure if it’ll make that big an impact 5p and they’re kind of the lower demographic, we’re really more cost conscious, so I think it should be more, and I’m also unsure at the moment as to how it will have an impact online shopping. I mean will they estimate how many bags you’ll have and then add that on later, or will they tell you at the checkout, because in that case, that will definitely have an impact, I think, if you see it in black and white before we’re about to pay online, that we’re paying so much more due to our bag use, I think that will have more of an impact. But when you’re physically in a shop and you don’t really know how much you’re spending and you get these bags, then I think it will have less effect then because you don’t know how much you’re paying until obviously the very end and you’re just confronted with the bill and you’ve already packed your stuff up, so I think it’ll have more impact maybe online, yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: To reduce obviously like the biological, well the impact it’s having on nature, and to kind of conserve wildlife, not only within England, but the EU and obviously wide, more widely. I think it also encourages us to be much more, just more aware of the world around us possibly because people will question why this is happening and oh, this is such a waste of money, but then I think maybe if there’s like a simultaneous campaign to kind of raise awareness of, and I’m sure there will be, as to why this is coming into force, I mean I don’t know, I don’t really watch television much as a student because I, I can’t, I don’t have a licence, I can only watch catch up, so I don’t really get adverts apart from if I watch maybe 4OD. So I’m sure there’ll be like a television campaign, but I don’t know much about that. So maybe students are maybe not quite as aware, I don’t know, maybe, maybe more aware because kind of growing up in a modern day society with more pressures of like the environment, they are more aware as the new generation, so yeah.
Interviewer: And do you think that the introduction of the plastic bag charge will affect you at all?
Participant: Yeah, I think to be fair I’m quite… 5p will make a difference to me, having said, I think I’m particularly savvy when it comes to money and I, if I can get out of spending something, I will. I just don’t think when it comes to maybe more adult and higher earners, it will make that much of an impact, particularly with the shops such as Sainsbury’s or Waitrose which are automatically associated with kind of higher earners and people on higher incomes. So I’m not really sure it’ll make much difference to the people who shop there, but that might be [?? 36.12] I’m not sure. So I don’t know [laughs].
Interviewer: So do you think you will change your bag use at all after the charge is going to be introduced or…?
Participant: Yeah. I will probably have maybe a bag for life or something shoved in my rucksack so I can carry or if I can’t put it in my rucksack, I can add, I can put it in that bag, yeah, something like that.
Interviewer: And do you think it will be easy quickly for you to be able to change the bag use or…?
Participant: What me personally or…?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah about yourself.
Participant: Yeah, I think so. I mean it’ll take maybe a month or so before I finally stop forgetting to bring my bag with me because I don’t, sometimes I obviously don’t plan to go on these top up shops and otherwise I’m shopping online. So in that respect, it might take maybe a couple of weeks, but I normally have a bag with me anyway that’s quite roomy. I’ll probably, it probably will have an impact on me quite soon if I don’t have much stuff to buy. So yeah [laughter] sorry it’s a bit of a convoluted answer but…
Interviewer: And do you think it can change any of your shopping behaviours at all, the charge?
Participant: If, it might mean that I buy less kind of impulse buys because obviously that would take up less room and mean that I wouldn’t really necessarily need a bag, I could just carry the intrinsic stuff that I need straight home with me, instead of buying a bag. I don’t know, I’m wondering whether it would mean that I would buy stuff with less packaging. I’m not sure it would because I would probably want maybe more packaging to make sure that the stuff isn’t going to get squashed maybe, I’m not really sure, but that’s just kind of, I don’t honestly think that would happen. I’m just trying to think what else it would mean? No, just basically I’d cut down on any spontaneous items I buy really.
Interviewer: And do you think the charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person or not?
Participant: Yeah. I think I would always walk out of the supermarket thinking okay, I’ve done something, I’ve done something good today, I haven’t taken any plastic bags. But and it would mean that I’d have less bags obviously sitting around in my kitchen, so I’m just trying to think what other ways it would impact on me… I think it will mean less waste probably because I’ll be buying less, so yeah, less waste packaging, so I’ll be more environmentally friendly that way, so…
Interviewer: Sure yeah. Do you think that bag reuse is kind of sufficiently encouraged in England or in Britain if you prefer?
Participant: No, not really. The single-use bags are so readily available on the supermarket end, they’re kind of more visible and just so cheap compared to the other bags that it’s just more tempting to go for them, and also I think possibly often the bags for life are quite superficial but they’re just not attractive enough to spend money on [laughs]. That’s bad but I’ve got one today which is kind of, it’s just one I brought from home in Newcastle, so I don’t normally buy bags for life, but it’s just I’d rather have the plastic bag. I think it’s just more attractive sometimes, so yeah, sometimes it’s not really made as attractive to buy a bag for life but that’s only going to Asda I’d say. In Marks and Spencer’s they have these very nice kind of vintage, retro-style polythene, I’m not sure what they are, like reinforced plastic, and kind of printed stuff on them, and they’re fifties style harping back to this kind of nostalgic view of England and that does tempt, will tempt consumers. So it depends on which supermarket you’re in. Really I think Marks and Spencer’s possibly there is more of a push to buy the bags for life because they can make money out of them. So it depends completely on whether you’re in more of a bargain, bargainous or [?? 40.36] a supermarket or a more kind of higher thought of and more expensive and high-end store, yeah.
Interviewer: You mentioned I think which kind of I picked upon, it is you said that the plastic bags, the single-use plastic bags, are kind of mmm, slightly more attractive than bags for life, some of the bags for life…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …and why is it so?
Participant: Sainsbury’s, they’re just kind of more vibrant and also, they kind of, the colours are Sainsbury’s [?? 41.11] but I like the branding and I think they’ve done, it’s part of the attraction of the supermarket, this kind of vibrancy and you are basically a walking advertisement with these orange bags. But I find it quite strange, I’m a historian, I’m quite interested in food history, and I think that possibly one of the ploys of the supermarket is that they’ve made such these bags that you can kind of be identified with the supermarket, because all the connotations of the brand are quite like homely and nostalgic-looking which, I think will quite, is quite nationalist possibly, and patriotic. So in a way, if you’re sticking with these bags which kind of are linked with English rather than the bags for life which can be quite garish and not as comforting, I think that’s why sometimes you would go for single-use bags. It’s quite strange, I don’t know if anyone else thinks this, but I just quite like the Sainsbury’s bags, and they’ve always got the slogan on, I can’t think… “Eat well for less” or something, and it’s always in kind of like quite old-fashioned writing and yeah, it’s just quite a comforting thing to carry round really because they’ve obviously been round for donkeys’ years and these bags for life are quite new things, so I don’t think they’ve quite caught on yet.
Interviewer: You know that when the plastic bag charge comes to effect in England there will be some types of bags and some types of shops where it will not apply…
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: …or it might not apply. So this will be shops like medium to small retailers and corner shops, takeaways, clothing shops, clothing and shoes…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …paper and biodegradable bags. Do you think and also the small, very, very small plastic bags that you can get at bakeries and fruit sort of sections. What do you think about this situation, the fact that these types of bags the charge is not going to apply in England? What do you think about that?
Participant: I think maybe it’s just a gradual legislation really and that it will eventually come in, but it’s important to kind of set a precedent with the major retailers, because that might encourage others to kind of take the initiative with the smaller ones. I do think it’s quite bad not to introduce the charge across like blanket, a blanket charge, but it’s obviously really difficult to enforce for the government across such small retailers nationally. So I can kind of understand why it started this way and I, I don’t, I don’t hold any judgement against the government as to why it’s already just started with the major supermarkets, because yeah, a precedent will be set for the smaller ones and eventually, hopefully everyone will follow suit. So and also, if you’re going to the grocer, I think maybe they’re quite local and normally on a kind of high street level, and you might not have a bag with you because it might just be an impulse buy you see when you’re walking past, so it’s, it’s a good idea perhaps not to introduce them straight away on the smaller retailers because also, it might be, I don’t know, maybe there’d be a bit of like… Is there a bit of maybe a bit of like a financial pressure, because obviously these bags might be some kind of environmental tax or something, so I’m not sure, maybe these smaller retailers might be able to not afford it or something. I’m not sure really [laugh] of the reasons why it’s not been introduced across it but I don’t hold any judgment against the government for not doing so straight away, yeah.
Interviewer: And the fact that actually this charge exists in as a blanket charge in Wales and Scotland…
Participant: Mmm, a blanket charge did you say?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah…
Participant: Oh!
Interviewer: …so all the bags, yeah…
Participant: I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: …in England will have these exemptions on the…
Participant: In that case, I do think it’s a bit silly that the rest of the country, the rest of the UK has been subject to it. I don’t see why [laughs], yeah, I, I suppose it’s a large area and it should [?? 45.27] to enforce but in my opinion, then it should be done imminently to introduce it across the whole of the UK [laughs] yeah, I don’t understand why.
Interviewer: And I also wanted to ask you, just to finish with the plastic bag business [laughter], to compare plastic bag charge with other types of charges, one is higher fuel duties, how do you think that compares to your plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think that higher fuel duty would perhaps be because the cost of driving and the cost of having a car is already so high and plus it wouldn’t apply to everyone would it because not everyone’s a driver as such, so I think this is much more of a universal contribution which we can all make and we already kind of know the dangers of plastic bags. It’s much more of a conscious decision whereas people who drive maybe have to do so for work, etc, or you know, maybe they’re disabled or something, so it’s not really their fault that they have to buy so much of this, whereas everyone makes the conscious decision to buy a plastic bag and they could bring a bag with them, so I agree more with the bag charge rather than higher fuel duties because the cost of a car is already so extortionate that yeah, and you can change your lifestyle in the case of plastic bags. So it’s more of an optional tax really, so it needn’t hit you hard as long as you change your lifestyle. So I agree more with the plastic bag charge.
Interviewer: And another charge which actually doesn’t exist in the country but it does exist on the continent, so for instance, Germany and Austria have it, it is a little deposit that people pay when they buy bottled drinks, so plastic bottled drinks basically. They put a small deposit in, something, a few P again, and when they bring the packaging back, the empty packaging, they get the deposit paid to them. What do you think about that? How does that compare?
Participant: Oh I’ve been to Germany myself and have returned plastic bottles because I know that I will get money. I think it’s a good idea. I know that there is still, it’s still quite a high recycling culture in the UK anyway, I mean it’s very efficient of countries like Germany to do such a thing, I just don’t really think it would catch on here because I think we’re quite traditional people and if something new comes into force, we wouldn’t really stick to it. Yeah, so in the case of plastic bags, I don’t think it would work because people will just tend to throw them away very easily and quite quickly after they’ve used them, so I’m not sure if it would really work in this country. I think it would depend on how you marketed it. Mmm, I’m not sure, so, it’s a great idea, but no, I don’t think it would work [laughter]. I think we’re just quite traditional people and, and I don’t think many will remember.
Interviewer: How does it look like in Germany? Is that the supermarket that accepts the…?
Participant: Yeah, and so I was in [?? 48.48] which was near Hamburg and on an exchange we would, at the weekends, when I was staying with my host family, we’d always go and return those and plastic bottles and get maybe, I think it was like 35 cents or something, it’s not very much but it does mount up.
Interviewer: It does, it would amount to you, well if that was 10 bottles or whatever, you would get 3€ 50 back which is…
Participant: Yeah, so…
Interviewer: …substantial.
Participant: Yeah, I just, I think that as a nation, we’re just not quite as [sigh] I don’t know, quite as aware as, and the remembering of being able to do something, I think it would take a long… If it did come in, it would take a long time for us to actually make the connection really, so yeah, it would be a long, long-term thing.
Interviewer: And what do you think, Georgina, will happen in about 10 years’ time as a result of plastic bag introduction?
Participant: I think that you’ll see more people with bags for life. I think that it might have maybe a knock on effect with how environmentally friendly we are in other areas, so for example, we might just begin to recycle more and maybe visit and choose stuff with less packaging and less boxy stuff so we can like reduce the amount of bags we can use to carry everything. So we’ll have a better impact that way. I don’t know, maybe because I think the bags for life sometimes the jute ones can have a bit of a status symbol, is seen as a bit more fashionable, so I think that it might kind of be incorporated kind of a bit more into the mainstream kind of just carrying bags for life, and not just for shopping, just with other stuff in, so maybe with books if you were going to school you could use one of those jute bags just as a school bag, because I’ve done that in the past when I was short of stuff to do, to carry things in. So yeah, I think just bags for life will become much more popular and perhaps a bit more fashionable and more widely used, so…
Interviewer: And what do you normally do with the household waste?
Participant: So we have a… I’m looking at them now actually, a green bin which normally holds all of our plastic and that’s the plastic recycling and also papers and then we have a black recycling crate, they’re both crates, the green and black crates, for, so the black one has, normally has glass in it, so that’s recycled every week on a Friday, and then we have the tall standing Bristol City Council bin for waste, just waste, and that’s collected, we normally put all of our rubbish into a plastic bin bag, a black bin bag in the kitchen and then obviously put it outside in the bin, and then that’s collected, black bins are collected every two weeks on a Friday again. But I would say that we, we’ve only got two bins for kind of actual waste and we do produce more than that normally, it’s sometimes a squeeze, so we could maybe do with an extra bin because there are five of us, but yeah, that’s how our waste disposal works really.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about environmental issues, just [overspeaking 52.23]?
Participant: I think I used to be more, I used to be part of like an ecological society at school because obviously there was a huge CO2 emission for that, but I think I’m less so now because obviously I have to do my own shopping and whereas before I might have gone for the more products that were more less packaging and more environmentally friendly, now I just, it sounds awful, I go for more for cost more than anything, but sometimes they do meet. So, for example, if the cost and the packaging, less packaging coincide when I go to the greengrocer’s on Gloucester Road, and that’s why I really like shopping there because you feel like you’re kind of doing something to benefit both the environment and the local area, and also it’s good for your wallet. So yeah, I would say I’m more environmentally friendly in that, when I do buy products that are more locally sourced, but sometimes it is just more convenient when I have less time and I’m feeling a bit tired and I’ve been sitting at a desk reading stuff the whole day, just to buy stuff from a supermarket, and really care more about the cheapness rather than how friendly it is for the environment, which is really awful [laughter], but yeah, that’s why I prefer shopping in Gloucester Road.
Interviewer: And would you say that environment is an important part of your identity or not really?
Participant: I think when I’m not a student it will be more because I will have more money to think about it, and it’s bad that I associate being environmentally friendly with high cost but I just, I do because I’ve heard of these places like [?? 54.09] Organic where you can get vegetable boxes but I still think it’s pretty expensive to do so. But so I would do that now but as I’m a student, I haven’t really and all the products in the supermarket which is more widely available obviously to me, such as, I think is it Doddington Farm or [?? 54.33] Jersey Cream Milk or just some more locally sourced stuff, they always seem to be kind of part of the taste the difference range, and more expensive, so that’s really the calculation I make of money over… So when I’m a bit richer possibly, but not at the moment, yeah.
Interviewer: And compared to other issues in modern society, how important environment is to yourself?
Participant: So other issues that are important to me probably include obviously as a student who’s currently not, hasn’t got a full-time job, money’s pretty important to me, and politics particularly at the moment, I think our, that will coincide with environment at the moment, but at the moment it’s politics I’m predominantly focused on, who the main people are because obviously we’ve just had a bit of a shift. So I think really what is important to me is what’s on the political agenda at the moment, and at this moment in time, it’s not really the environment, but that could all change and maybe on 5th October that would come back on to the agenda as, for example, the media and both politics, obviously the media’s important to me because it kind of dictates how I think unfortunately, they would publicise that as something that’s coming into force, so yeah, so I think it’s, it’s variable how important environment is to me. It’s completely dependent on politics and, and yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, but politics, you just mentioned politics now several times, could you just very briefly, you know, emphasise the, you know, the, what you mean by that, you know how you said it’s important and yeah, just a couple of words really?
Participant: So I have, well I suppose it’s politics but kind of filtered through the media, so I know a lot more since last week, for example, about obviously the Labour leadership contest, but I, I’m only aware of that through my reading of certain newspapers and I can name them, the Daily Telegraph and my parents and grandparents also buy the Daily Mail which some people don’t agree with, but no… Yeah, so that’s how I kind of gain my perception of my world around me and it’s largely dictated by the media and so politics, I suppose, as I mentioned, I would probably clarify as being what the media really and how it portrays what’s going on in Parliament because I don’t really watch something, I don’t, for example, watch Prime Minister’s Questions. So I think probably it’s, I don’t know, I don’t know how to describe it. It’s more scandal than what real politics is which is debates in the Houses of Parliament [laughter], yeah, so I suppose that in that way, the environment wouldn’t really come up unless it is a scandal, like the Daily Mail publicised it to be a couple of years ago, so yeah [laughs]. Oh dear…
Interviewer: Yeah, so maybe just a couple more questions before we finish because we’re kind of running out of time. Do you feel that you know enough around environmental issues?
Participant: No. As I said before, I think the only reason I knew about the plastic bag charge originally was because of the Daily Mail campaign. It hasn’t really affected me so far, the environment and its problems. I mean they say that coal will run out in a finite number of years, and so will oil, but as that hasn’t affected me personally, I don’t really know about it, and yeah, so I just, I think whether the environment affects me as such, it all depends on how it’s marketed. So it, for example, where provided, Council provided recycling bins etc, and it is, there is a kind of kudos to being environmentally friendly, being healthy, so eating organic vegetables and stuff, and being healthy, that kind of coincides because it’s both local and good for you. So it all depends, the environment is important to be if it’s marketed well really, so yeah, and how, for example, shops do it. So if locally made products such as, I don’t know, maybe cake or biscuits made locally rather than shipped and from a factory from like, I don’t know, Australia or something ridiculous or Scotland, like Botanics razors are, I think, so that would, that would make me think more about the environment, but unless it affects me directly and it’s made to sound attractive, I don’t think it will do unless something grave happens honestly. So, for example, that’s why the Daily Mail campaign was so effective because it was very shocking, but that was all kind of, it was the way it was marketed as well. It sounds wrong but also yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: Yeah sure, and another thing is that, you know, do you feel that you, you have sufficient skills to perform things for the environment currently?
Participant: Well we do have a Council provided bin, I’m not sure if it’s actually where the recycling goes, but that’s quite convenient for me to do that and [?? 1:00:25] and they’re collected. Aside from that, I am in quite a good area to buy local products, I’m in quite a built up area, so obviously there’s a demand for stuff like this, so I can be more environmentally friendly that way if I go to Gloucester Road and go to the local grocers, for example. Apart from that, I’m obviously a university student, and there is the Bristol Get Green programme, so and also the Bristol Give programme which is at the end of each academic year we can hand over stuff that you no longer want when you’re moving house, for example, so I am, as a student, I believe I’m more able to be environmentally friendly. I’m not really sure as, when I graduate, whether I will have so many opportunities, obviously [?? 1:01:16] I suppose monetary, I will obviously financially be able to contribute physically to things like Council Tax which is obviously being able to collect these bins, and maybe even make donations to environmentally friendly charities, trying to improve the situation. But physically, as in just me going out and doing stuff and maybe recycling or giving stuff away to, instead of throwing it away, there are more initiatives if students do that I think, especially because they can’t afford a car and I have to walk most places or get a bicycle, so obviously that’s much better for the environment, yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: Sure yeah. Thank you very much, Georgina, that was really informative and really interesting, so thanks a lot and thanks for the suggestions at the beginning. I’m really sorry that, you know, there’s some constraints that basically the tool has to be repeated the way it is and I will say we’ll have a look if we can change anything, but I didn’t mean to be rude about it obviously [laughter].
Participant: No, no, no it’s fine [laughter].