Interviewer: Thank you very much for taking part in the diary study, so we just have one hour to speak first of all about your experiences of the diary study and then just to discuss in detail some of the questions that we touched upon in the diary. So there are no good or bad answers, we’re just interested in your honest opinions, yeah, so do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: Not that I can think of at the moment.
Interviewer: Okay. Could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It was fairly easy, I didn’t have any problem with it I don’t think.
Interviewer: Was there anything that was tedious at all?
Participant: There was only the one thing probably actually on the sort of tick box bit, it was just when you got so far you’re scrolling back to remember which column was which, but that’s just probably me.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: It depends when it is in the month, obviously not long after payday I’ll probably do a half decent shop size wise, sometimes take a list, sometimes don’t, when I’m in…
Interviewer: How often do you go shopping, sorry, did you say once a month?
Participant: It depends really, sometimes it’s a bigger shop you know, not long after pay day and then just wee shops after that, other times it’s just I do a wee shop for like maybe, I work shifts so like I’m 3 days on, 3 days off basically so maybe you know, depending on what shifts I am it depends what shop I do you know, whether you know, stuff for the home or stuff for work, and that’s, I’m very, I don’t know what the word is, I suppose random with my shopping if you know what I mean, there’s no clear day that I go or time that I go you know, because I go once a week or 3 times a week, it depends you know?
Interviewer: Right, okay, so 1 to 3 times a week pretty much?
Participant: Sporadic’s the word probably.
Interviewer: Sporadic, okay, and what stores do you normally go to to buy food?
Participant: Being honest Tescos because it’s less than a few minutes away from me.
Interviewer: Is that like the small Tesco or the big one?
Participant: It’s a Tesco bigger one, yeah, it’s not a massive one but it’s a big enough one.
Interviewer: Like a normal size supermarket?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah they have so many like Extra, Express whatever, it’s hard to remember.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So when you’re choosing sort of what food to buy, what is more important and what is sort of less important when you’re making your decision?
Participant: First of all I’d probably say ingredients, I’m Coeliac so I’m looking for gluten free so a lot of the time that I’m picking up things to see what’s in them to see if I can eat it or not, and then once obviously over the time I realise, or find out what I can eat and can’t eat you know, then I’m just buying that really, and having a look at new things now and again that I sport to see if you know, what’s in the ingredients to see if I can eat it or not.
Interviewer: Okay, and how do you normally travel to the Tesco that you go to?
Participant: Usually by car and very occasionally walk.
Interviewer: And do you go with someone or by yourself?
Participant: Usually by myself.
Interviewer: Do you know roughly how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: I’d say not a lot really. If it’s on my plate I eat it, I wouldn’t say there wasn’t much food waste really.
Interviewer: Okay, not a lot is fine.
Participant: Obviously like if I have a bit of salmon the skin goes in the bin, that kind of thing, but I don’t really, cut bits off chicken, that goes in the bin, but that’s not really you know?
Interviewer: Could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: God, that’s a hard one! Not as common now, does that help, I don’t know, I’m not good at these type of things.
Interviewer: That’s fine, just like anything that comes to your mind.
Participant: Environment, they’re not as common now, I really… sorry.
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: Yeah, just environment and recycling, cost, like nowadays more and more people take their own bags, don’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, that’s fine. Do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: I don’t really, thought about being a point in my life that I remember.
Interviewer: You can’t remember?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: I’ve got 2 or 3 bags for life that are in the car, so I’ve got a canvas one and two sort of plasticy ones and like I said they’re in the car so usually I do remember them, there’s the odd occasion I forget to put them in a car after being shopping and the next time I’m there I’m like I’ve not got them, so that’s only then that I’ll pay for the small, thin plastic bag that you get.
Interviewer: So is it kind of an automatic thing then that you use the bags for life?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: It’s part of your usual routine?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And is that the same for if you’re going for like a big, I don’t know, weekly shop, and…
Participant: Yeah, it doesn’t matter what size of shop it is, I usually take my bags with me.
Interviewer: Why do you think that bags for life have been given that name?
Participant: I know some of them if they’re damaged they will give you a new one, and it’s to promote the reuse of the bags so you know, hopefully you know, you aren’t buying the wee 5p bags and you’re using your own and saving the environment a wee bit.
Interviewer: So do you think the name, or do you think bags for life match their name?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s a decent enough name, I don’t think bags for a year you wouldn’t, you know, bags to save recycling you wouldn’t you know, bags for life, it’s like a good name.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think are sort of good about bags for life, and what is not so good about bags for life?
Participant: They’re stronger, they take more stuff, like I find them easier to pack, less chance of ripping, negative side maybe most wee plastic bags are biodegradable and I suppose the bigger bags for life aren’t biodegradable, but then you’re going to reuse and reuse and reuse more than you would a biodegradable bag.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you bring or use bags for life rather than your own bags, like a rucksack or rather than the sort of thin plasticy ones?
Participant: I wouldn’t think to use a rucksack for shopping, I don’t know why but, I see my rucksack and for, I use a rucksack for going to work, stuff for work and I go hillwalking so my rucksack’s for that you know, it’s not, I’ve never thought of it as a shopping bag, and bags for life I just think they’re, me personally anyway the ones that I have are sort of, you know they’re not going to burst on you and they take more shopping and they’re easier to pack, I think.
Interviewer: Okay, so you store your bags…
Participant: I’ve got OCD, OCD with my shopping packing maybe, I don’t know.
Interviewer: So when you go shopping you keep your bags in the car you mentioned?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you have any bags sort of at home as well or is it just the ones in the car?
Participant: Yeah, there’s 2 or 3 bags in the car and there’s probably 2 or 3, I’m just trying to think, in the cupboard in the kitchen.
Interviewer: In your opinion then how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I’d say it’s still important, I know with our own stores when they first started charging 5p for a bag that the self-service, they took all the bags away from there so you know, when you went into the self-service sometimes there wasn’t bags, so you’d either have to carry it out by hand or get, or even put it back in the basket, I’ve seen people do that, put it back in the basket and take it out to their car, or trolley, and then or you know, pack a bag for life, since that after a couple of months they put the plastic bags back in on the self-serve, obviously they updated the software to add in that you could buy a bag.
Interviewer: So do you think it is important then, or not?
Participant: Well, I think it needs to be there because not everybody’s going to remember and bring a bag with them.
Interviewer: So what if plastic bags completely disappeared from shops, how do you think you would find that?
Participant: It wouldn’t really bother me I don’t think, not for food shopping anyway.
Interviewer: Okay, so it wouldn’t really affect you?
Participant: Yeah, I wouldn’t take a bag like if I was shopping for other things like clothes or that, it doesn’t feel normal.
Interviewer: And do you ever reuse sort of plastic bags that you buy in the supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah, as bin liners or taking other stuff, actually I’ve got a plastic carrier bag that’s got my, a couple of like, I know it sounds really stupid this but a pair of hi-vis trousers and waistcoat for work.
Interviewer: What did you say, sorry?
Participant: It’s quite sad, but I keep like for work I have to wear occasionally hi-vis stuff, so I’ve got you know, like my trousers and my waistcoat…
Interviewer: Yeah, you keep that in a carrier bag?
Participant: Yeah, it’s probably just for if they get dirty then they’re in that bag and I just take that home and wash them there, not the bag, the clothes.
Interviewer: And did you say, do you use them as bin liners, plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay…
Participant: Not so much now because obviously I don’t get as many plastic bags but.
Interviewer: Yeah, but if you do have them in the house then you sort of use them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so you know what the plastic bag charge is then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember where you sort of heard about it for the first time?
Participant: It was probably a couple of years ago, I don’t know, last year sometime, I can’t really remember, last year of this year, and I know like I think if I remember rightly, Scotland’s, it happened in Scotland first.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: It’s fine, I see it as reasonable, mostly in cost to yourself and then you can equate the cost to you know, plastic bags being not as recyclable I suppose.
Interviewer: Do you find the introduction of the charge surprising?
Participant: The instruction of the charge?
Interviewer: Introduction, so like when they brought he charge in.
Participant: Oh introduction, sorry, I’d probably say no because I know like well the government in this country’s sort of eco-target, if that’s the right word.
Interviewer: And what do you think is good about the charge versus not so good?
Participant: I don’t know really, probably even just the 5p makes people think probably more about you know, like you know, paying the, I don’t know how much, well bags for life are various prices but you know, they maybe think about buying a bag for life rather than you know, a few of the wee plastic bags.
Interviewer: Is there anything not very good about the charge do you think?
Participant: No, it’s a plastic bag, I don’t know, I think it’s a fair sort of, it’s not too dear, it’s not too cheap, well it is quite cheap actually but it’s not dear, I suppose some people might not be put off by it, some people will be, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: I didn’t know that but it’s kind of expected if you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, so you haven’t heard about it at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: To try and reduce the unnecessary use you know, for recycling purposes, plastic bags floating about outside.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s been kind of successful in doing that?
Participant: Yeah, I’d say so.
Interviewer: Okay, so did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affect you?
Participant: I’d probably say it changed the shopping habits by you know, the fact that you take the bags with you rather than just you know, putting everything in the plastic bags out the shop, I’d say that’s the big difference, you see more people going in with their own bags rather than using the plastic bags that are there and paying the 5p for them.
Interviewer: So it’s affected your bag use?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, what about your shopping behaviour, do you think it’s changed at all?
Participant: No, I’d say it’s stayed the same.
Interviewer: So how quickly do you think it took for you to start sort of bringing your own bags after the charge was brought in, was it quite easy or did it take quite a while?
Participant: Fairly easy, I’d probably say on the odd occasion I’d be doing that anyway, taking my own bags, but before the 5p charge, just like I said you know that the bags are stronger, the bags for life, and they’re not as sore on your, not that I, it depends how long you carry them, if you’re walking you know, sort of 10, 15 minute walk you know, they’re cutting into your hands, whereas the bags for life and wider handled, they don’t really affect you as much, they’re not as, this is the wrong word, they’re not as baggy, if you know what I mean like if you’ve got a bag for life they’re sort of constructed in a sort of cuboid shape…
Interviewer: Yeah, I know what you mean actually, yeah.
Participant: …whereas if you put something in a plastic bag it sort of becomes a round shape if you know what I mean, so it tends to hit your legs more.
Interviewer: Yeah, I know what you mean. Have you become a more environmentally friendly person after the plastic bag charge was introduced do you think?
Participant: I wouldn’t say that’s really made much difference other than bag use, I’d recycle stuff before and probably do the same as what I done before and after the bags came in, I mean I don’t, there’s a lot of things I don’t, like your small plastic bags for fruit, like if I’m buying bananas I don’t use, it depends what type of fruit that I’m buying but like bananas I don’t take a plastic bag for it, I just, bananas as they are, I’m trying to think if there’s anything else, any other fruits that I put in that are, things like that, I don’t know.
Interviewer: So do you think you noticed any changes after the plastic bag charge in your local area and sort of in your country?
Participant: There’s more, more people using bags for life, less bags like I said earlier, probably less bags you see floating about in the wind if you know what I mean, can’t really think, sorry.
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: I’d say that’s about it you know, probably you don’t see so many sort of bags stuck to trees or at the side in bushes and that.
Interviewer: Like visible litter with the bags, that’s reduced?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, what do you think about how the plastic bag charge has been delivered and applied in your country?
Participant: I think it’s fine the way it’s done. I mean it, I know like occasionally, well other shops you know, like if you’re going shopping for clothes you might buy and you might not so, and I wouldn’t wander about with a Tesco canvas bag or whatever you know, going and getting my clothes shopping, and then if I do go shopping and you’re buying a few things you know, you put everything in you know, like if I was in one shop and bought I don’t know, a pair of jeans or a jacket or whatever you know, you’ve got a bigger bag, you don’t mind paying for it, and then if you’re in other shops and you can put stuff in the same bag that you’ve already got, then I do that.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: I’d say so, yeah.
Interviewer: So when the 5p charge come in to effect in England there’ll be some types of bag and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, I was just sort of interested to know if you think that that’s fair, or not?
Participant: If it’s different to Scotland it’s not fair. It’s racist.
Interviewer: So is there any reason why you think it’s not fair, other than the fact it’s different in Scotland?
Participant: Well why should it be any different to the next country to us you know, obviously it’s been trialled in Scotland you know, so why should it be any different in England, we’re all the same people.
Interviewer: And how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as a congestion charge for example?
Participant: I think the only place that I know that there’s a congestion charge would maybe be London, so it’s hard for me to comment on that, but…
Interviewer: What if they were going to start charging on plastic bottles or individually wrapped vegetables, how would you feel about that?
Participant: That’d be quite complicated actually, but probably going back like, well it’s been a few years but when I was in America round about 2000 you know, I noticed there like everything, cans and bottles would have money back on them, so you’d find that more people collected them and took them back to the shops to recycle and get their credit for their recycling, and then plus they’d have, whether they were homeless or not, people going about the streets picking up cans and bottles hat were littered about and getting money for themselves.
Interviewer: So do you think that’s a good thing?
Participant: Yeah, it keeps the, well certainly in America I noticed it, I’d probably say it kept the place a bit tidier you know, there wasn’t cans and bottles lying about at the side of the road.
Interviewer: Yeah, because people were picking them up?
Participant: Yeah, or if the people didn’t recycle at home then you know, either homeless people or whatever, they were going round picking them up to get themselves some cash or credit towards food, whatever, because I know that, I stayed with a family and I know that I done recycling with them in the machine like beer bottles and that, and it is just a credit they got for it towards their shopping, well that was like 15 years ago so.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, so what do you think will happen, if anything, in 10 years’ time as a result of the introduction of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: In 10 years’ time?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: A lot more people will have bags for life, I’d probably say that even in 10 years’ time it’d be phased out, on to something else, either bags made with different material or you know, something different, I don’t know, more… I can’t see it being, well I know years ago like paper bags but then it went to plastic and now you’re going for bags for life so I don’t know what the next stage would be in that.
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: Yes and no.
Interviewer: Okay, do you have any examples of like how you save water or…
Participant: Just thinking like switching off, brushing your teeth, obviously that is one of the questions in the, I don’t always remember but I try to, and likes of if I boil the kettle it’s predominantly at the minimum and any extra water that’s boiled I usually put in the basin of soapy water, at work it’s different, the kettle’s normally always full but then it’s boiling for usually to use the whole kettle if you know what I mean, there’s enough people for the whole kettle to need refilled, there’s occasions that it’s not but it’s only then probably about half filled, half full, sorry.
Interviewer: So do you kind of have to remind yourself to do, like to turn off the taps and empty the kettle a bit or do you do it automatically?
Participant: The kettle in the house, automatic, turning off the tap when I’m brushing my teeth, I probably think about it more because it’s just been habit, which is strange because when I’m abroad, like if you’re in Spain I don’t use tap water like I do here for brushing my teeth, if you know what I mean, but then the water’s not as good over there and it’s just, I do it automatically in Spain you know, just I don’t use the tap and then just use the tap to rinse the toothbrush and that, whereas over here I tend to think more about having to switch the tap off you know, in-between.
Interviewer: What about energy, do you try and save energy at home?
Participant: Yes, like switching off sockets, like once things are charged I switch off at the socket, switching various appliances off at the socket as well, I don’t leave the telly on standby, what else, the only things that are really left on are clocks, anything with a clock in them.
Interviewer: And is that a habit that you switch off all the plug sockets?
Participant: Yeah, it has been for a few years probably, maybe longer.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Yeah, quite often, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples?
Participant: Jars for screws and bits and bobs, sadly washing-up liquid bottles, when I finish one here occasionally I take them into work because we’ve got, our detergent at work comes in like a 5 litre tub so I’ll take either like a wee washing-up liquid bottle into work now and again just when the one at work’s on its way out, what else do I reuse, if I have a takeaway, which is very seldom, like a Chinese takeaway, I’ll usually, depending on what’s been in them, but I’ll usually wash the plastic tubs and keep them and use them again if I make, it’s various it can be for other foods or just bits and bobs or like again screws or stuff like that, bolts, I’ve done that at work sadly.
Interviewer: And is that a habit, do you do that automatically or do you have to remind yourself to do it?
Participant: The Chinese containers I probably do that automatically, there’s containers there and if I need them for anything whether it be you know, if I’ve made food for a few days and them in it or use them for putting food in to reheat, or even I’ve used them, either jars or plastic tubs for like cleaning paint brushes.
Interviewer: And when you’re sort of doing your food shop do you ever pay a lot of attention to the packaging?
Participant: I’d say probably not because there isn’t much choice if you want something whether it be its packaged up, eh?
Interviewer: Okay, so packaging’s not very important to you?
Participant: It doesn’t, it doesn’t dictate my choice, no.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you recycle?
Participant: Cans, bottles, toilet roll tubes or whatever, the kitchen roll tubes, any plastic tub that hasn’t had like raw food in it, if it’s had raw food in it I put it in the normal waste, if it’s not had, like say if it’s had chicken in it I’ll put it in the normal waste, if it’s had tomatoes in it I’ll put it in the recycling, I don’t know why but I just don’t want to put raw food in that bit, and you don’t, probably if you’ve a lot of the time as well if you’re washing out stuff all the time you’re sort of negating the recycling bit, eh?
Interviewer: Why do you like to recycle?
Participant: To do my bit for the environment, and we’ve got, it’s probably, well we don’t produce a lot of waste in the house anyway but the Council’s changed all the bins you know, so like our recycling bin’s twice the size of our normal waste bin now and the garden recycling is the same, it’s twice the size of the normal general waste bin.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, how often do you drive?
Participant: Too often probably, I only do between, I only do about 3,000 miles a year.
Interviewer: So sort of like every day or a few times a week?
Participant: A few times, it depends actually because like, it depends what I’m working on and stuff as well you know, like the long drives that I do are just weekends away or away hillwalking with friends, or popping into friends that live different places.
Interviewer: Do you ever sort of save up your car trips?
Participant: I wouldn’t say I did that often, there’s occasions you know, like och, I’ll just do all that in the one day and that’s me, but it’s not very often that I have to do that if you know what I mean, I don’t, I don’t think, although there is times you know, like I say I need to go here, there and there, so I’ll just do it all in the one day.
Interviewer: Do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I think I said in my thing I wasn’t sure because I’ve got an automatic and it’s a 3 litre so I like my cars but I don’t know if I drive in a fuel efficient manner having an automatic.
Interviewer: It probably does it automatically then, yeah. And do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How often?
Participant: Say, fairly often, I’ve not been cycling much this year because I had an operation on my knee so that’s changed that, but I go to the gym 2 or 3 times a week so that’s like in place of my cycling, whereas by, if it was a nice day I’d go out for a cycle, eh?
Interviewer: Okay, so sort of how many times a week or like a month would you go for a short walk, or?
Participant: A few times a week.
Interviewer: And why do you like to walk, or cycle before your knees?
Participant: I enjoy, I used to have a wee cycle round, it’s sort of, I’d go, if it was a nice day I’ll go a cycle through like [?? 41:41] to estates like, it’s not like a housing estate it’s like a country estate if you know what I mean, like that.
Interviewer: So for leisure?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: I’ve, yes and no, my normal washing is done with, it’s non-bio, I think my normal washing’s done with normal washing but I do a non-bio wash for any of my sort of waterproof/hillwalking clothes, and it’s just the non-bio.
Interviewer: And what about organic food?
Participant: I don’t really focus on that, I occasionally probably buy it, it’s not something that I look at when I’m shopping.
Interviewer: And what about sustainable food, so foods that go towards protecting animal welfare or forests, fisheries?
Participant: I actually can’t say I’ve noticed anything like that really.
Interviewer: And do you support any environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so all of these behaviours we’ve just sort of talked about, driving, recycling, reusing things, water, things like that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary study?
Participant: Well obviously I paid more attention to it, but I was already doing it if you know what I mean, it just made me think like you know, your questions in the diary study, “oh, I do do that”, and at work I think I put in my diary study, at work I switch off lights that people have left on a lot of the time, like for example when we’re on nightshift you know, somebody may have left some lights on in the offices so I’ll go and switch lights off in the office.
Interviewer: So do you think maybe doing this study made you realise that you do quite a lot of behaviours that you didn’t think you did before maybe?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, but I mean switching off lights at work, I’ve done that for ages, and I’ve even said to some of the guys you know, to do it
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Recycling, using less energy. Like I said, I’m not sure if like one you know, it’s some of the things you have to wash out before putting in recycling and then all the different vehicles that come for your recycling, is it really making that much of a difference?
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Fairly concerned.
Interviewer: What types of issues are you concerned about?
Participant: Just the effects that they have on the planet, but also like there’s a lot more things that are packaged and I always think like you know, if the companies that produce the thing could set-up something so you could send them back to them and they could reuse them, I’m trying to think of what, like even like, it’s probably a long way away but Amazon maybe, I’m not picking on them but order something from Amazon and it comes in a big massive box and you’ve just got a wee item in it…
Interviewer: Mmm, I’ve noticed that.
Participant: …and then you could, if they just had a sticker that they gave you or something, you could package up the box and send it back to them and they can reuse it or like beer bottles, your shower gels, your kitchen cleaning stuff you know, there’s loads of stuff that possibly doesn’t need to be recycled but could be reused nut then how much is that going to cost to send it back to companies, is it you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and how important is the environment to sort of your identity and your life?
Participant: With my identity?
Interviewer: It’s like is it a big part of your life or not really?
Participant: I wouldn’t say it’s a big part, no, but I mean I do get on to people at work for throwing like, in the office we’ve got a bin at our desk, like there’s a general bin and at the back of the room we’ve got a recycling bin, I’ve got on to people for putting paper in the general bin when they only need to walk to the back of the room to put it in the recycling. Quite sad annoying people like that but.
Interviewer: How concerned are you, if at all, about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I’m conscious of it, I don’t think I create that much waste in the house.
Interviewer: So sort of compared to other issues in modern society, so social issues, economic issues, health issues, how important, if at all, are environmental issues to you?
Participant: I’d say fairly important.
Interviewer: Do you think as important as the other issues or less important?
Participant: It’s difficult eh? I’d probably say as important, it’s quite common for environmental issues these days you know, recycle and reusing.
Interviewer: So do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Probably not, I suppose there’s probably more I could know but.
Interviewer: Is that something you think could be improved, that you’d like to improve on?
Participant: Yeah, probably, like I said to you, is it really environmental when you’re washing stuff out to be recycled?
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: I question like you know you’re rinsing things out before you recycling them you know, like I rinse the milk cartons out, do you have to, a lot of things say to rinse them out before recycling so we do that, is it, that’s maybe negating the actual recycling by…
Interviewer: So you could do with more information like such as that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, I don’t actually know whether you’re supposed to or not.
Participant: Yeah, and then there’s stuff like not everything’s marked if you can put it in the recycling or not, so you question yourself over some items.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, and do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I wouldn’t say it’s a skill, or maybe resources you know like I said there’s recycling bins at work and the Council provide us with different bins for recycling here, so I don’t use the wee food waste bin, I’d probably say there’s only 10 houses in my street and I’d probably say half of us use the food recycling bin, but I don’t particularly have a lot of food waste to be put in that anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you do have the resources?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: Support from who?
Interviewer: So the government…
Participant: Other people or government?
Interviewer: …environmental organisations?
Participant: It could probably be a bit more, I think more information, like…
Interviewer: So support in the form of information is needed?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, just like is said you know, whether you can recycle some things or not.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you think there’s enough communication on environmental issues, on what people should do for the environment?
Participant: Probably not, like I said there could be more communication, information for what you can and can’t recycle but then if they’re going to give you a book then there’s recycling for that, but it’s maybe just a symbol on products that allow you to know if it can be recycled and what recycling it goes in with it.
Interviewer: So are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I think I do more than some, maybe not as much as others, but.
Interviewer: Is there anything that you’d like to change about your environmental behaviours?
Participant: I wouldn’t mind sort of maybe having solar panels or something like that.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, okay…
Participant: But then it’s the [?? 53:42]
Interviewer: So what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: I can’t think of any problems apart from the roads, potholes.
Interviewer: Potholes, okay. Okay, great, so we’re just sort of running out of time a bit now so I’m just going to…
Participant: Potholes and the speedbumps, yeah, sorry.
Interviewer: Oh, and speedbumps as well?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: What, not enough speedbumps or too many?
Participant: Too many, because that’s like, it’s not, I don’t think that’s environmentally friendly because you’re slowing down and speeding up, slowing down and speeding up, slowing down and speeding up so you’re wasting, plus there’s enough potholes in the road to not need the speedbumps.