Interviewer: So maybe the first thing that I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Overall not too intrusive. I think for me it’s quite difficult to do on a weekend, because from 6:30 until 11 I’m likely to be out. So I think on a weekend possibly that was the most difficult time for me to fill it out. I didn’t feel that the questions, a lot of the questions were relevant, and they were suitable if you didn’t, you know, if you hadn’t gone shopping. It took you straight to the end section, there was no fluffy areas, but, it was okay.
Interviewer: Was there anything that you found, you know, maybe not so easy to write down? Anything like that?
Participant: The only bit that I was unsure of, really, was on the first page, if you had been shopping that day, it asked, “Has anyone else in your household been shopping that day?” and I just assumed that meant outside of yourself, other than yourself. That was the only thing I thought, I was a little unsure of, but aside from that, no.
Interviewer: Okay, yes, I see that first question, one of the first questions in the beginning, yes.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you in the diary at all?
Participant: No, they were questions I was half expecting, I think.
Interviewer: So maybe the first kind of area I wanted to talk to you about is your food shopping trip. If you could describe in your own words how your typical food shopping trip is like.
Participant: I typically only buy top ups, I don’t tend to do one big shop. I think that when you do it like that, you tend to only spend what you want to spend, but if you go for a bigger shop, I tend to pick up all the offers, the buy one get one frees and the three for twos, and I don’t necessarily need them. The supermarket in my village is about a mile and a half away from where I live, so I tend to go home first. I don’t very regularly go straight from work. I go home, pick up my bags for life and tend to go straight back down. It’s quite a small supermarket and I tend to go there 99% of the time. I know where everything is, I know the people that work there, and you often see people that you know, so I tend to only go there for things that I know that I want.
Interviewer: Sure, and how many times a week or a month do you go to buy food? Maybe a week.
Participant: Three times a week.
Interviewer: Three times a week?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And what kind of shop do you go to, to buy your food normally?
Participant: It’s a Tesco supermarket.
Interviewer: How big is it?
Participant: It’s quite small.
Interviewer: Is it Tesco Metro? Tesco Express?
Participant: It’s just a standard Tesco, to be honest. It’s not an Express, it’s smaller but it’s bigger than a Metro.
Interviewer: Okay, but it’s not a superstore either?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: Kind of in between. Sure. Yes. Why did you choose that particular supermarket for your shopping?
Participant: Because it’s convenient, it’s local to me.
Interviewer: Are there any other similar sized supermarkets in the area, or that’s the only one?
Participant: There are others, but I choose to go to Tesco.
Interviewer: Why that one and not any other ones?
Participant: I choose to go to Tesco because of Clubcard points and personally, the other supermarket in the area is Asda, and I find the Tesco own branded food and goods are better quality than Asda own brand food and goods.
Interviewer: How do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: I don’t very often, it just depends what I fancy for tea that night.
Interviewer: Okay. So is it something that you just walk around, how does it happen?
Participant: I usually speak to my parents and my partner, and decide what, if my parents are cooking something that I like, or if my partner and I fancy having food here, which is quite often the case, then I’ll speak to him on the way home from work and just arrange to go and get something is how it usually works.
Interviewer: Does it ever happen to you to take a list with you?
Participant: On the rare occasions I do a big shop yes, but on top up shops, no.
Interviewer: What is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: Quality, price, taste. Yes, those three, mainly.
Interviewer: Yes, and quality-wise, what is, kind of, what about the quality is important to you? How do you define the quality?
Participant: I think with fruit and veg, for example, I like in Tesco that you can look through and select your own fruit and veg, so you can sample the quality, if you like. The quality of the packaging, so if it’s eye catching, I guess, does come into it, to a certain extent. Reputation. I know that it’s got a good quality, it’s something that my parents have always bought, so I’ve always eaten it. Yes, that’s about it, really.
Interviewer: Yes, and what is less important when you buy things in supermarkets?
Participant: I don’t, the packaging probably, but I still feel, yes, that’s the least important, anyway.
Interviewer: What about the packaging in particular?
Participant: For example I wouldn’t necessarily go for a Tesco Everyday, because the packaging is quite basic, but then I probably would go for Tesco own, which isn’t, you know, top of the range or fancy packaging, it’s just, sort of, standard, but you know, you like to make sure that the bags are in a good condition and that sort of thing, so then you know they haven’t been handled by many people, or…
Interviewer: Okay. How do you usually travel to the store?
Participant: Car.
Interviewer: By car, yes.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So did you say that that shop is not really at a walking distance from your place?
Participant: Not with goods, no.
Interviewer: Yes, of course. Do you usually go to shop on your own or with someone?
Participant: The majority of the time on my own. I tend to think it’s quicker. Aside from that I do go with my mother or with my partner.
Interviewer: When you go with your mother or with your partner, how do you coordinate who buys what?
Participant: It’s usually, if I go with my partner, for example, he usually pushes the trolley and I just select what goes in it.
Interviewer: So you walk together.
Participant: Yes, similarly with my mother, as well, yes, we go there [?? 8.00] so we just go together.
Interviewer: Yes. How much of your food goes to waste, you know, every week, let’s say?
Participant: It depends what I make. I don’t think a lot of the food goes to waste, because I tend to try and make a bigger portion so that I have enough for lunch and work the next day. I wouldn’t say a lot of food. I mean, if I’m making a roast, then there’s quite a lot of waste with peelings and things like that, but that’s only once a fortnight. That’s not very regular.
Interviewer: Yes, but is there anything, like, the food that hasn’t been used at home, or you know, bought and hasn’t been used? Or not really?
Participant: A small amount but not a lot. You know, nothing that I’ve noticed or that I’m concerned about, there’s a large amount of waste, that we’d be wasting money or anything. Quite regularly I do buy a pack of three peppers, for example, and do tend to throw the green pepper, but there’s not, there hasn’t been enough that I’ve noticed, and been worried about how much I waste, no.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you would like to add to the food shopping kind of routine?
Participant: No, I don’t think so. I mean, I tend to, no, I don’t think so, I tend to buy toiletries from the home bargains as opposed to from Tesco, because it’s cheaper, so I don’t tend to do it together, as well, so that makes it easier, so I don’t think there’s anything I’d change about specifically food shopping.
Interviewer: Okay, right. Then we’ll move to the next, kind of, set of questions, and the first thing I wanted to ask you about is a little bit unusual. If you could tell me maybe five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”. What does it make you think of?
Participant: Mess, the environment, I have too many, I don’t know, I begrudge paying 5p for one. I’d struggle to think of another. They’re not particularly aesthetically pleasing.
Interviewer: Not particularly pleasing?
Participant: No, aesthetically pleasing, no.
Interviewer: I see. Do you remember when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Were they in store when you were tiny? Were they already in stores, or did people use anything else?
Participant: I couldn’t tell you.
Interviewer: Okay. Right. What kind of bags do you personally use to pack your shopping when you go food shopping?
Participant: I have a laminated bag for life, and I also have a material bag for life. I have a few of those. Oh, I do have, sorry, I do have plastic bags for life as well, the ones that are sort of up from just a standard plastic bag, the ones that are a little bit more expensive, so a 10p bag.
Interviewer: Right. Yes. When you go shopping, how many of those do you bring, and what types?
Participant: I usually take one material bag for life, and one laminate bag for life. That usually covers me, because I only do a smaller shop.
Interviewer: And that laminated one, is it kind of a bigger size, isn’t it?
Participant: Yes, it’s quite big.
Interviewer: It’s quite big, yes, right. Why do you prefer those? You know, you also mentioned that you have the plastic bags for life, yes?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is there any, kind of, difference between ways you use this one and that one?
Participant: I think they’re just sturdier and I can just fit more in, so it just means that when I go for my top up shop I can usually fit everything in the laminate, and usually take the material as a backup. I feel that they’re sturdier, so I don’t tend to take the plastic ones, even though they are a stronger plastic. I just find these are far better quality.
Interviewer: Yes, and the plastic ones, how did you end up with them?
Participant: I’ve probably gone to the shop and haven’t had my laminate bag, so I’ve had to buy one.
Interviewer: Does it happen that you get those in stores often?
Participant: I’d probably say on average once a month.
Interviewer: Once a month, yes, and one bag, something like that?
Participant: Yes, just one bag, yes.
Interviewer: How about the single use bags? The 5p bags?
Participant: I do have, I have a mound of them, which is, but I never use them, which is why I make such a conscious effort to get the others, because you know, in the past I perhaps have taken it for granted and just gone and done a shop and just got the 5p standard bags, but then I have so many that I’ve got nowhere to put them, and I don’t want to just throw them because of obviously the environment. So they just build up space in my cupboard that I don’t want, so I make a conscious effort not to get those.
Interviewer: What do you do now to these single use bags that you have at home? Do you find them any use or anything?
Participant: I can’t remember the last time I did use one, so probably not.
Interviewer: Not really, yes. You don’t use them for rubbish or anything like that?
Participant: No, I tend to have, [coughs] excuse me, wicker, I’ve got wicker bins in the rooms in my house, so I just tend to use those and then empty them into a black bag, so I don’t tend to use them as rubbish, no.
Interviewer: Sure, yes, okay. Bags for life, do you reuse those?
Participant: The what, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you reuse the bags for life? The plastic ones? The thinner ones?
Participant: Yes, I have done, yes, I’ve just taken them to the shop, yes.
Interviewer: So it’s again only for the shopping that you use them?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay, fantastic. What do you think, you know, in terms of, sorry, no, I forgot to ask one more question.
Participant: It’s okay.
Interviewer: Where do you store the bags that you take shopping with you?
Participant: Just in a surplus cupboard in the kitchen.
Interviewer: Do you remember each time just to take them when you go shopping, most of the time?
Participant: Most of the time, yes.
Interviewer: Is it easy to remember?
Participant: Yes, it’s right by my back door for that purpose.
Interviewer: Sure. In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores, in supermarkets?
Participant: It is important, because if you don’t have them it would make life very difficult, and I’m sure people wouldn’t go to the shop as often, because it wouldn’t be something that some people enjoy. So it is important to have them there.
Interviewer: Yes, and what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores?
Participant: I mean, people wouldn’t have a choice but to, you know, but to take their own laminate. So yes, they’d, I think they have to make them available just in case, but if they weren’t there then people wouldn’t have a choice but to take their laminate bags.
Interviewer: How do you think that would be? Would that be okay, or not?
Participant: Initially, probably not, but people would get used to it and have to remember.
Interviewer: Yes. Sure, yes. Do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Yes, they charge 5p for the single use small ones, and then they charge 10p usually for the thicker, bigger one.
Interviewer: When have you heard of it for the first time?
Participant: When they were on the news, when they were first introducing it, really. I can remember the Welsh Assembly putting it in place.
Interviewer: What do you think about the 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: Don’t get me wrong, if I was doing it all the time I’d probably have an opinion about it, but because I do consciously try to remember to take my own laminate bag, and I don’t tend to spend on it, I think it’s a good idea to try and reduce the amount, I don’t know too much about the effect that it has on the environment, but I know that in landfill sites, etc, they have got a lot of problems with plastic bags, so I do think it’s looking after the planet, etc, it is a good idea to impose those charges and I quite like that the 5p charge normally goes to charity. It’s not a charge, like, a lot of shops in my area donate the 5p to charity, so I think that’s a nice idea as well.
Interviewer: That’s nice, yes, sure. Is there anything that you don’t like about the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: It’s an inconvenience, but aside from that, no.
Interviewer: Yes, and do you find it surprising that the plastic bag charge has been introduced?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Because, as I said, because the problem that they have with the environment, and that they’re building up to a stage that they aren’t decomposing for 10, 20 years, and something has to be done, and it’s just a small step to try and change people’s mind sets, to remember your laminate bag or remember to keep recycling your bags, and I don’t think, I’m not opposed to it at all, no.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. When, you know, hold on a second. When the plastic bag charge has been introduced in Wales, has it affected you at all? Were you a more frequent user of single use bags, or how did that happen?
Participant: I probably was a more frequent user of single use bags, which is why I’ve got so many at home, but when it was introduced I don’t see it being a problem, no.
Interviewer: Yes, and do you remember how quickly you managed to change your bag use after the charge has been introduced? Was it easy?
Participant: Yes, it was for me, because in my local supermarket they gave out free laminate bags on the first occasion.
Interviewer: Oh right.
Participant: The shop hadn’t opened very long and it was, I guess, a marketing ploy, I guess, but it was, you know, it had Tesco branded all over the bag, but it was something that you remembered to take again, and you know, it was a nice freebie, so it meant that you didn’t have to buy the 5p bags.
Interviewer: Yes. So was it an easy change for you to, you know, to stop using the plastic bags, basically? The 5p bags?
Participant: Yes, I would say so. I don’t see it, as I said, you know, on occasion I would forget, so I’d say it’s mostly easy. On the times that you forget then you have got the option to buy them, but it’s not, the more, the more used I am to taking the laminate bag then, you know, I don’t feel it’s a problem at all anymore, I do find it quite easy and straightforward, yes.
Interviewer: Has the introduction of the charge changed your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No, not at all.
Interviewer: Nothing really got affected because of it?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Maybe the frequency of your shopping? No?
Participant: No. No, I don’t think it’s affected it at all. In fact, the older I’ve got, the more I tend to go to Tesco than what I did when the charge was probably first introduced, but that’s probably down to an age pattern rather than, you know, spending pattern or…
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Did you notice any changes after the plastic bag charge was introduced?
Participant: You do notice a lot of people in the supermarket with their own bags for life now, yes.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Have you noticed any other changes, like physical changes, whatever you can think of? Visual changes?
Participant: No, nothing I can think of. The 5p bags, they’re not actually visible. The cashier on the self-serve carries them around, whereas the bags for life and the 10p bags, they’re actually on the wall display, in my supermarket.
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: So I suppose that’s the only difference, is that they actually advertise the more expensive bags, which you can reuse, but the 5p bags are usually just carried around.
Interviewer: Yes, and have you seen any impact on the environment? You know, maybe urban environment or natural environment in terms of, you know, after the charge has been introduced, or not?
Participant: Not that I’ve noticed, I’m afraid, no.
Interviewer: In terms of litter? You know, plastic bag related? Not really?
Participant: Well I know, as a household I don’t throw any out, so that’s the only thing that I can tell you that I’ve noticed, really.
Interviewer: Okay, yes. That’s fine. What do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is delivered or applied in Wales?
Participant: What do you mean, sorry?
Interviewer: In terms of when you go to different places, is it applied? Is the 5p charge applied everywhere in the same way, or not? Maybe you’ve seen some exceptions?
Participant: No, I haven’t seen any exceptions, no.
Interviewer: So whenever you have to pay for it, yes?
Participant: Yes, and I’m obviously prepared to pay for it because I know it’s coming.
Interviewer: Have you ever seen, you know, any cahiers already trying to put things in bags for you, the single use bags, or it doesn’t happen where you shop?
Participant: No, I can’t think of an occasion where they’ve assumed I’ve wanted one, no.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Okay. Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in Wales?
Participant: Overall, probably not, no.
Interviewer: What makes you say so?
Participant: Like I said, it’s just on a display on the wall, really. I mean, there could have been some spending on a television advert or those sort of things that tend to have more of an impact on the audience, really, just to remember your bag for life. Even if it was just on the end of a supermarket advert, there’s hundreds of those, and I suppose it’s different because that would be national rather than just Wales, but I suppose it would be straightforward to put a bit of a tagline at the end of the advert saying remember your bag for life.
Interviewer: Okay, yes, very good, thank you. Then, you know, I also wanted to ask you about the following, because the 5p charge is going to come into effect in England just now in a couple of weeks’ time. Have you heard about it?
Participant: Yes, my friends live in London.
Interviewer: Okay, yes. So basically what will happen in England is that some types of shops and some types of bags are not going to be charged. So medium to small retailers and corner shops will be exempt from the charge, so people will not pay their bags in these kinds of shops. Also takeaways, the same, and things like clothing shops. Clothing shops and shoes, again, those shops will not charge 5p, and also paper and biodegradable bags are going to be free, as well as the little bags that you get in the bakery and fruit. What do you think about this way of applying the charge in England?
Participant: I don’t think there’s any difference, really. The only things that they are charging for, they buy the same things as the bigger supermarkets.
Interviewer: Yes, but then in Wales it’s a blanket charge, so everywhere.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Whereas in England, you know, they’ve chosen not to do it in certain places that I’ve just mentioned, and certain types of bags. So what do you think about that?
Participant: I would say yes, you may as well do it all over, really. If you’re going to start to introduce it, you may as well get people used to it and just put it as a blanket approach to everything, because the bags that you buy, you know, in a clothing shop or, if they are thrown they have the same sort of impact on the environment as what they would if you had bought them from a supermarket, for example. I just, in my opinion I think it’s a little bit pointless. They may as well have done the whole, you know, every sort of plastic bag.
Interviewer: How about paper and biodegradable bags, which again are not going to be charged in England?
Participant: I can see that would make sense, because that is environmentally friendly and it’s far easier to recycle paper. That is something that you can recycle, whereas you can’t recycle a plastic bag, and the biodegradable, obviously, they speak for themselves, so I can see, I can understand that part of it, yes.
Interviewer: How about the very little plastic bags that, you know, you get in bakery or in fruit and veg sections?
Participant: It’s the same in Wales, though, isn’t it? That if you’ve got open foods, that you need to put it in a plastic bag. So we don’t get charged for those either, so I can understand why that would continue.
Interviewer: Sure, yes, okay. Another question I want to ask you about this is how do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges? For example higher fuel duties or higher prices for environmental reasons? How do you think the plastic bag charge compares to that type of charge on fuel?
Participant: I’ve never really considered it, really.
Interviewer: Well for instance, if tomorrow the government said, “We are going to slightly increase the prices of petrol to discourage people from driving as much,” how do you think that would compare to the plastic bag charge, in your opinion?
Participant: Well it wouldn’t be as cheap, would it? Like a 5p charge, I don’t think people really consider that has much of an impact to their day-to-day finances, whereas I think that if you increase fuel, for example, I think that would have a massive impact on people’s day-to-day, you know, I’d love to have a job locally and not be able to drive, but it’s just not plausible, so I have to have driving to get me around day-to-day. I think that would be a massive difference.
Interviewer: Sure, yes, and would you support that kind of charge on fuel?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No. That’s fine, yes. Another idea is, you know, it doesn’t exist in the UK but it exists in other places, in Germany, for example, and in Austria. There is, it’s not a charge, it’s like a little deposit that people pay for plastic bottles, and some kind of plastic packaging. So when they bring these to the store, they get the deposit back. Right. Yes, and what do you think, how do you think that looks compared to the plastic bag charge, and just by itself? You know, what do you think about this kind of idea?
Participant: I wouldn’t be particularly supportive of it, because I do, I’m probably not as organised as a person, but you know, we are encouraged to recycle and we are given recycling boxes by the council, so I do recycle my plastic into the boxes and it gets taken away weekly, so I don’t see that as any different to what the supermarket would be asking me to do, so I would be a little bit more put out if they were asking me to do that.
Interviewer: Would that stop you from buying drink in plastic bottles, or not?
Participant: No, it probably wouldn’t stop me, no, but then I probably wouldn’t take them back.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. What do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the introduction of the plastic bag charge in Wales?
Participant: I’d like to think that it will have some sort of impact and reduce the amount that are being circulated, and I would like to think that it would have, by ten years’ time, they would have had a reduction in landfill sites and things.
Interviewer: Yes, and do you think that is likely to happen?
Participant: I can only go by what I’ve seen, and in my area the majority of people do take bags for life with them, so I’d like to think that yes, that that would happen, in my area, yes.
Interviewer: Thank you. Yes. Just checking time. So yes, we still have a little bit. So another question is do you tend to save water and energy at home, and why?
Participant: I’m not mindful of it, no, purely because I just forget and it’s not at the forefront of my mind, probably. I do switch lights off when I’m not in the room, and when I was doing the questionnaire I probably did switch the tap off when I was brushing my teeth more often, when I tried to remember, but that was just because it was brought to the forefront of my mind. On a day-to-day basis, no, I probably wouldn’t. I don’t, like, I don’t switch the kettle plug off, or I don’t switch the toaster plug off in the morning, or the television plugs. They will all stay on standby.
Interviewer: Right. Is there anyone in the house who actually is quite the opposite of that, who will be, you know, looking after others, the lights and this and that, saving?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No? Not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: That’s fine, yes, and do you tend to reuse things at home?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Do you tend to reuse things at home, any kind of things? Instead of throwing away?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Not really? So things like jars, tubs, things like that?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Not really? Yes. What happens to your household waste at home? If you could tell a little bit about what you do with the waste.
Participant: I recycle paper, plastic and glass. Anything else will just go into a general black bag for normal waste. I do try and recycle food as best I can, but I don’t particularly like it very much, so I maybe don’t do it as often as I should. That’s generally the rules of it, really, is the glass and paper and plastics are recycled.
Interviewer: Yes. What do you think about recycling facilities in your area?
Participant: Yes, they’re quite good. We were given, each house was given three boxes that are different colour coordinated, so you know which box accommodates which material, and you also get a food bin and a wheelie bin, and they come around and collect it once a week, the recycling, and twice a week, once a fortnight, for the general waste. I think the council give us the decomposable bags for the food. Whenever we’ve run out we can just request a new lot of bags, and I think it is made quite straightforward, really.
Interviewer: So are you happy about those?
Participant: Yes, I think it’s fine.
Interviewer: Great, yes. Another question I wanted to ask is how often do you drive? Is that on a daily basis?
Participant: Every day, yes.
Interviewer: Do you tend to save car trips at all?
Participant: If my sister, perhaps, is going to visit my grandmother, and I am, she’ll probably pick me up on the way, but that’s not very often.
Interviewer: Yes, and when you drive, do you tend to drive in some kind of, you know, the way you save fuel, or not necessarily?
Participant: Not necessarily.
Interviewer: Yes, that’s fine, yes. Does it happen to you to walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: I do walk the dog every now and again to my sister’s house, but it’s more of a case of that the dog needs a walk rather than I am being conscious of not driving, if that makes sense.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy things like Fairtrade or sustainable or organic or eco-friendly products?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, and what is the reason if I may ask?
Participant: Because they’re too expensive.
Interviewer: Too expensive, yes, compared to normal ones, yes?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And Fairtrade as well?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you, just in general? What does it entail, from your point of view?
Participant: Well, it would be things like recycling. It would be things like switching your lights off, the plugs, etc, aerosols, I know that they’re an issue. Driving, probably. Those things that you’ve mentioned, really, is what I would associate with it.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Not particularly. I should be more so, but I’m not particularly, no.
Interviewer: Why do you think you are not currently, and why do you think you should be more, as you were saying?
Participant: I don’t know, because I’d like to think that when I start a family that this world will be a better place for them. At the moment, it’s out of probably laziness and being disorganised. It’s just something that doesn’t cross my mind.
Interviewer: Yes. What does the environment mean to you, just in general?
Participant: I’ve never given it much thought, which probably is an answer in itself.
Interviewer: Would you say it’s a part of your identity, or would you say it’s part of your life, or not necessarily?
Participant: Well, I’m very lucky to live in, sort of, a very pretty village with lots of surrounding areas. I do probably think about the surrounding areas around me, like I said, I have a dog so I do tend to go walking around the parks and things like that, but as a blanket approach, I think outside of that I wouldn’t give it much consideration.
Interviewer: Yes, sure, and compared to other issues in modern society, things like, for example, you know, social area, economic area, health, you know, in that kind of list of priorities, where is the environment, for yourself?
Participant: Not particularly high.
Interviewer: What kind of issues would be higher up?
Participant: I don’t know, most things, if I’m honest. My work/life balance, my home life, everything, I suppose.
Interviewer: And, kind of, society-wise?
Participant: Yes, I mean, I suppose I’m concerned, like I said, about the immediate community, but no other concerns about it, really.
Interviewer: How would you, kind of, yes, if you could just tell a little bit more about why you think that our individual things are somehow a priority in relation to the environment?
Participant: I guess it boils down to naivety, not looking past it, slightly selfish, perhaps. It’s just something, they’re just things that impact me directly, and even though the environment does impact me directly, it’s not something that I give consideration over.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Would you say that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Why do you say so?
Participant: I think I’d only know things that were publicised on the news, and things I’ve picked up in education, for example. I don’t think there’s anything, I don’t research it or I don’t look to find more information about it. It’s only if it falls on my lap.
Interviewer: How do you think things could, sort of, be improved in that respect? What do you think could be done for people?
Participant: I could probably take the time to research it, or to find out more information about my community, or about Wales or, but I just don’t spend the time to do so.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support from the third parties, like government or environmental organisations, you know, to be more, to be able, to enable somehow people to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: No. No, I don’t. There’s nothing that, around my area or work area or anything like that, that speaks of that, no.
Interviewer: What kind of things would you think would be sensible for people to, you know, have available around?
Participant: Anything regarding [?? 41.18], for example, or I don’t know, facts, I guess facts, like in my supermarket, for example, facts about how many, what plastic bags are doing to the environment, or those sort of things, but nothing I’ve given much thought into.
Interviewer: Sure. Do you think they should provide more infrastructure for people?
Participant: Possibly, yes.
Interviewer: Can you think of anything in particular?
Participant: Not outside of what I’ve already said, no.
Interviewer: Yes, yes, that’s fine. Yes. Are you happy yourself with what you are doing for the environment, currently?
Participant: No. Like I said, I could be a lot more strict with myself in regards to my recycling, specifically food. I tend to put food in the general waste rather than in the recycling waste, on occasion. I think I could be more strict with myself, yes.
Interviewer: What do you think could be a nudge, you know, for changing those kind of things?
Participant: I don’t know, really. There’s no one else that can control it other than myself, really.
Interviewer: Yes, but if you think, if you had, like, more information, more facts, that could change potentially, yes?
Participant: Yes, possibly. I suppose if I had more, if I had more of an understanding, what I was doing to the environment by not doing these things, I guess that would make a difference, yes.
Interviewer: Fantastic, yes. Thank you. Just maybe last question, regarding your neighbourhood, what kind of things do you particularly like, and what kind of things would you say are a little bit of an issue?
Participant: I really like the recycling boxes that the council give us. I really like that they make it simple to recycle. That, you know, that you just put plastic in the red bin and, etc. I don’t think there’s enough bins in my area. So for example, like I said, because I have a dog, if the dog leaves mess, for example, there’s not so many bins that I can put it in, so that would probably be something that I would like to change. Aside from that there’s nothing, no burning topics.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. What kind of things do you, you know, kind of like in terms of anything in your neighbourhood?
Participant: They have got signs on lampposts about chewing gum. I do quite like that they do put on about leaving chewing gum on the pavement, what impact that may have. So they do ask you to put chewing gum in the bin, but there’s nothing else really that I can think of now that…
Interviewer: Sure. Yes. Thank you very much for the interview. It’s been really helpful and really interesting, I can reassure you. You know, everyone’s interview is actually quite, quite useful.
Participant: Oh good.
Interviewer: So thanks for taking part in this, yes.
Participant: You’re welcome.