Interviewer: How did you find the diary experience overall?
Participant: It was fine, yeah, it was good, it was okay, the only problem I had was my phone is pretty full up with photographs at the moment and I’m just in the process of getting them off my phone…
Interviewer: The pictures?
Participant: The pictures, yeah, so when it came to, like the first couple of days I had problems, the email that came in during the day, when I went to take photographs at night I realised that I had no space to take a photograph, so 1 or 2 times I had to send it the day after once I’d, because basically I’ve got 200 photographs on my phone which should have been deleted in advance, well not advance of this questionnaire of course but just in general, and so it was finding, I’ve been finding the last 2 or 3 weeks that every time I went to take any photographs I’ve, it says there was no space left in the phone so I had to go back into my phone and delete things, but that was it, that was the only problem, I wouldn’t even call it a problem, it was just an inconvenience sort of thing you know?
Interviewer: And the diary itself, was there anything that you…
Participant: I found it a bit repetitive, quite a few things you were answering and you’d go back, well you’d go back to it in the question next again was like say, “what did you recycle today?”, and then the question, the next, when you move on to the next section it said, “can you enlighten us as to what household items you recycled?”, so I felt I was repeating myself and I tough maybe I should have answered that the first time round, but anyway.
Interviewer: That’s okay you know, whichever way you found to answer this is fine I’m sure, I’ve had a look at the diaries anyway overall and everything seemed to be you know, more or less alright, there were a couple of little things like here and there but other than that you know, the data is there, so.
Participant: The only problem is if, my son is in America at the moment and if he’d have been in the house we’d probably have had a hell of a lot more food and there’d have been more stuff being bought every day because basically we had, our freezer was full before I started this market research thing and so it was, so it was just a case every day I was just buying top-ups as I said you know, there was not like a major shopping at any one stage over the last 10 days whereas if my son had been in the house, he’s 25 and his girlfriend comes along like every second or third night, there would have been more, there’s just no shopping, you might say, “cor, they didn’t buy very much food at all”, but that’s the reason why.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, I see, yeah, that’s no problem you know, there are always you know, things happening in our lives so that’s not an issue. Was there anything that you found you know, surprising in the diary at all, or not?
Participant: Not really, I mean the bit at the end when, the table and you had to go and check everything, “do you talk about environmental issues every day?”, no, occasionally and I know you were trying to like, are you concerned about the environment by turning off like standby and whatever but these are things you know, you should do but you don’t because it’s easier to just turn on the TV then for them to reboot Sky every day, every night sort of thing you know, so you always leave things on standby as opposed to turning them off at the switch and then have to wait 3 or 4 minutes to, you know, these are the bit you know, that’s the only thing, that’s the only questions I found, it’s a bit, which they always came up every night, and that was a section you had to fill in and it was the same questions every night.
Interviewer: Yeah, because some of these behaviours, yeah indeed, some of these things you know, they don’t vary so it’s the same things every day but for some of them there are variations, and also you know, depending on people, so it wasn’t possibly yeah, to have like adapted to every particular situation.
Participant: No, no, “do you buy ink cartridges?”, you know, no, not every day…
Interviewer: Of course not every day.
Participant: …maybe twice a year, maybe twice a year.
Interviewer: But it could be one particular day in those 10 days when you know?
Participant: I know, yeah, I know, exactly, exactly.
Interviewer: Of course, okay, no problem, so maybe the next thing we could speak about is your shopping routine, so coming back to that, could you describe your typical food shopping trip, how does it look like?
Participant: Well, as I say I travel 20 miles to work every day so occasionally what I would do is in my lunchbreak, like today, I would, there’s an Asda in Grangemouth where I work and I normally would maybe go down at lunchtime and buy a few things, I never actually buy a list, I don’t have a list every day to go shopping as I’ve said, it’s just I know basically what we need to get sort of thing and I buy a few things in the Asda in Grangemouth but not anything, not like vegetables or any meats or whatever because basically I don’t have a fridge facility in the work, so the majority of things is when I come back home after work is I pass a Tescos, a big superstore on the way coming home so it’s just handy to just pop in there and just buy whatever you need, or I get a phone call from my wife to say, “can you get this and can you get that?”. We don’t tend to do a big shopping every weekend, it’s a) I don’t see, I don’t class weekends as a time to spend 2, 3 hours in a supermarket, so if I can do it at all I’ll do shopping at night-time or just pick up the essentials, or go up maybe 7 o’clock, 8 o’clock at night to Tescos, which is the most local store, but I don’t tend to do a big shopping at the weekends at all.
Interviewer: And who does that big shop, or nobody?
Participant: Well we don’t do it, I mean as I say I tend to do the majority of the shopping mot days but it’s, I’ll spend £30, £40 ne day but I won’t, it’s not like it’s a you know, the shopping for the next 2 weeks or whatever you know, like £100 shopping, we just, it’s dribs and drabs sort of thing you know, because as I say my son’s away, my son has been away in America for 4 months and he’s coming back next month so the 2 of us ourselves don’t tend to eat as much as we would and we don’t tend to cook the same sort of foods as you’re cooking for a young man you know, sort of thing you know, so we just buy like salmon or fish dishes or things like that, and the majority, well in the summer time being the salads of course, things like that, so it’s not been you know, you’re not buying vegetables to make soup or you know, to make casseroles or what you know, sort of things like that, that’ll come in the wintertime of course but not in the summer you know, yeah.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, so usually you mentioned that you buy food at Asda or Tescos, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And why is that, why those 2 supermarkets?
Participant: They’re just the 2 most local and at hand, one is a mile from my workplace and the other one’s half a mile from my house.
Interviewer: And what size are they, are they the big kind of…
Participant: Oh, they’re big, the Asda’s not big, Asda’s not like a superstore, it’s a, I don’t know what they class them you know, you get country stores for Sainsbury’s and whatever you know, but the Tesco in South Queensferry is big, it’s a big one, the Asda is as big as but it’s not what you’d class as a general Asda superstore you know, like there’s, yeah, but yeah, they have the essentials you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, how do you plan food shopping generally?
Participant: How do I plan it? Well, usually in the morning we say what are we going to have for our tea tonight, and well we know what we have, if not we’ll say okay, let’s get some salmon fillets or let’s get a couple of steaks or whatever, but as I say, the majority of stuff’s in, when we do do a shopping I’ll probably tend to buy maybe 4 or 5 meals maybe on a Saturday morning, I go up to Tescos early on a Saturday morning, usually about half-past 9 or so when it’s quiet, and I’ll spend, I’ll just go round and pick up loads of stuff and the majority of it all goes in the freezer, we’ll keep maybe 2 or 3 meals out and the rest just goes in the freezer, so that’s us got our food for the next week say, and the daily journeys are just to buy fresh vegetables or salad or milk, bread, that’s the routine normally you know, it’s not like we’re buying for a big family you know, we’ve not got that, different if you were interviewing somebody who’s got maybe 3 or 4 kids, they’ll have a totally different shopping routine from what I’ve got you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, of course, yeah, and what is important to you when you choose things in supermarkets, well food in particular, what is important?
Participant: What’s important? Well you at of course the cost, of course the price is always like, I used to work in another town close by and they had 3 supermarkets so I could you know, I know it’s a bit sad to say but I would on a day wander round, they were quite close to each other so you get an idea what’s you know, and they’ve always got the market leaders, what’s the best price sort of thing, but I’ve got quite a good knack of actually knowing prices because I go to them so regularly, I know the prices in certain supermarkets so I think if like a certain coffee, Azira Coffee for instance I’ll go to Frescos and it’s full-price but you can go to Asda and they’ve got them at half-price, so I’ll buy it in Asda you know, there’s no, so I’m a bit, I would, I’m not thrifty but I mean what I do is I know where there’s, I don’t just buy, I wouldn’t buy what do you call it, their own, anybody’s own make, I don’t buy the sort of white labels or whatever you know, whatever, Tesco is white and green label, I don’t buy anything like that, I always buy if it’s,, it’s be like Tesco’s Finest or their, I wouldn’t buy their budget food or anything like that, maybe I should, I would save more money but sometimes it’s the quality of food that’s more essential you know?
Interviewer: And apart from the price what is important, what else is important?
Participant: Accessibility you know, it’s like there’s an Aldi, my wife says there’s an Aldi over in Dunfermline which is about 10 miles away and she says she went to it once and she thought, “oh aye, I got a really good shop in there”, now you do get quite, as the advert says you get a lot for your money, but I wouldn’t drive 10 miles over the Forth Road Bridge to buy a shopping when I’ve got a shop on my doorstep you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, but in terms of like food purchases what else is important apart from the price, particularly food items?
Participant: Well as long as, it needs to be fresh and good quality, fresh and good quality are I mean certain shops you can buy things and within a couple of days they’re starting to turn, especially fruit sort of thing you know, you know that hopefully you’re buying grade 1 fruit when you’re buying it n Tescos or, I’m not so sure about Asda sometimes but there you go.
Interviewer: And both of these supermarkets you’ve mentioned that you use often, they are both situated at driving distance, so one you said is close to your work so that’s far away and the other one?
Participant: The other one’s less than a mile, about half a mile from my house.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to walk there or not?
Participant: I have walked occasionally but the problem is if you do walk and then you buy too much you’ve got to carry it back and then by the end of the journey my shoulders are out of joint sort of thing you know, especially if you buy milk and you buy some beers or a bottle of wine that’s quite a weight to carry half a, well more than half a mile back home sort of thing you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, yeah, and do you tend to do shopping on your own or with your partner or both?
Participant: On my own.
Interviewer: And is it just because, is there any particular reason for…
Participant: My wife takes too long.
Interviewer: Okay, right, typical.
Participant: She’ll hum and haw about she should buy and I’m saying, right, I just go in with an idea and I just pick up and keep, I never stop, I just keep walking and I just pick up and just keep moving round all the aisles, because my wife will go back and forth and I’ve no time for that, that’s why I say I don’t shop at weekends really because I like my time off for doing other things other than just shopping you know?
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you not being able to use some of the things you know, food things that you bought and that it went to waste?
Participant: Oh yeah, it does.
Interviewer: How often does this happen?
Participant: Fairly regularly, fairly regularly, I mean salad gets thrown out about twice, salads turn you know, even when they’re packaged and they say they’ve got a 3 to 4 day sell by date they’re brown by the second day most, some, the majority, so salads go out, some vegetables because, yeah, vegetables as well you know, potatoes, onions they’ve gone off, and, or they go to seed, and bread, bread as well, but that’s probably about the majority, bread, bread, vegetables and sometimes fruit, fruit as well because you can sometimes go a bit mad on buying too much fruit and it never gets eaten so it lies in the fruit bowl and it’s all mouldy you know?
Interviewer: And does it happen every week, or?
Participant: No, not every week, but…
Interviewer: Sometimes?
Participant: Yeah, I’d say 2 out of 3.
Interviewer: And you know, now kind of switching to the question that we also discussed in the diary which is around bags.
Participant: Bags, mhmm.
Interviewer: Yeah, so one first thing I wanted to ask you about is a little bit unusual, could you tell me a few words or expressions that come up to your mind when you “supermarket plastic bag”, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Well, I’ll tell you what, I used to be worst person in my life, the worst person around, I used to use plastic carrier bags every day in Tescos, Asda, use them all the time and when Scotland introduced the 5p carrier bag I still used to do it and I used to get a row from my wife, so I decided to what do you call it, start, in my car I’ve got about 7 or 8 carrier bags and the hessian bags as well, which I don’t really like carrying because they’re, I don’t mind having a bag for life which you can fold up but I don’t like going about with the big hessian bags, but they are in the car too for like if I know I’m going to have a wee bit heavier shipping i.e. like wines or whatever, you need a sturdier bag than a plastic bag, but what are you saying, what’s the word, the one word I would say when it’s…
Interviewer: Yeah, what does “supermarket plastic bag” make you think of, just a few words you know, a couple of, yeah, maybe like distinct words, like it makes me think of this, it make me think of that.
Participant: Promotion for starters, promotion for the company you’re using, but then who’s really caring about a carrier bag, they’re essential but other than that I wouldn’t say, there’s nothing else I would say about it, a carrier bag’s a carrier bag, you know?
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and do you remember when you’ve seen them for the first time?
Participant: Carrier bags?
Interviewer: Yeah, the plastic ones, yeah.
Participant: I don’t know, I mean I’ve always had carrier bags, I mean I’m 58 year old, I don’t know how, I always remember, in shops you always used to get, well you used to get paper bags of course I the olden days didn’t you, going back here now, I don’t honestly, I couldn’t, I don’t know when I first saw plastic carrier bags, it’s been at least I’d say 20 years, I don’t know when initially honestly, that’s a hard question that one.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, no that’s fine, it’s interesting for us as well you know, whether people remember or not, I don’t have the date here at the moment.
Participant: I don’t, I mean I do remember in the olden days you used to get, I’m saying the olden days but you used to get what do you call it, before even like there was real superstores, I’d say going back to the 80s I’d say, 80s thinking about it because there was no Tescos in those days it was William Lows and there was only Scotmid, or the Co-operative in these days, so yeah, I think they still had carrier bags, plastic carrier bags.
Interviewer: And do you remember at all how they appeared in the stores or?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Do you remember at all how they appeared in the stores?
Participant: They’d ask you, when you’re at a checkout they always gave you a carrier bag, the till, the girls at the till, they never actually what do you call it, said, “would you like a carrier bag?”, they’re always made accessible, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, so coming back to you, you just started speaking about this actually and it was the next thing I was going to ask as well, so how do you normally pack your shopping when you go to buy food?
Participant: Tins first…
Interviewer: No, no, I mean what kind of bags do you use?
Participant: Oh right, how do I pack, right okay, I use well I use, it depends what I’ve got close at hand, I’ve got about 5 or 6 bags for life in the car…
Interviewer: Yeah, what kind of bags for life are these?
Participant: What stores?
Interviewer: No, no, no, what I mean, what kind of quality?
Participant: Heavy plastic, 10p ones, the ones you pay 10p you know, they’re supposedly meant to be bag for life you know, they’re a bigger bag than your normal…
Interviewer: Carrier, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, one use bag, you know?
Interviewer: I see yeah, and what do you do with those at the end of their life sort of?
Participant: At the end of their life, well when…
Interviewer: When they die?
Participant: When they die, when they’ve got holes in them you mean, they would just go in the bin.
Interviewer: Okay, do you ever exchange them in the shop for free?
Participant: I’ve never noticed that before.
Interviewer: Yeah, they’re exchangeable actually for free.
Participant: Are they?
Interviewer: Uhuh.
Participant: Right, okay, I didn’t know that, well I’ll look out for that then, okay, yeah, even the one use bags? No?
Interviewer: I believe all the bags for life, what is called bags for life should be exchanged for free.
Participant: Bags for life?
Interviewer: Yeah, are exchangeable for free.
Participant: Oh right, well…
Interviewer: When they are completely broken, yeah, and you return it to the shop and they recycle it for you and they give you a new one for free.
Participant: I never realised that, okay, I’ll have to check that out, I just bag, you’re in a supermarket and you, the one day that you don’t have any what did you call it, bags with you you just, you have to what do you call it, you just pick up a bag, so pick up the bag for life and you never, you don’t read the small print saying that you can get this, I’ve never noticed that, I’ll keep an eye out for that now, that’s good.
Interviewer: And then you know, those bags for life that you’ve got, so you’ve got a few you know, those plastic ones and also hessian ones you mentioned, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how many of those do you have in your car boot normally?
Participant: Hessian ones I’ve got 2, and I’ve about 6 or 7 probably plastic, heavy duty plastic ones.
Interviewer: And then you bring them into the store each time you’re shopping?
Participant: I just usually bring 1 or maybe 2 at the most, 1 or 2.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to buy the 5p bags?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, that happens when I go to Marks & Spencers.
Interviewer: I see.
Participant: Because, and even in Tescos too, I mean it happens sometimes, I mean if I buy, what happens is I’ll go shopping and I’ve not really got a list, which I should really, which probably you should keep to because then you only buy what you need, because I’ll go along and I’ll pick up things extra and then I think, “oh, I can’t walk out to the car with this amount of stuff I have in my hands, so I end up buying a bag, just for the sake of it, but always when I’m in town, when I’m in Edinburgh I’ll pick up, go to Marks & Spencers and you never have bags when you know, if you’re in at the weekend you don’t go about, well I won’t carry a bag in my pocket when I’m going to town for the day sort of thing you know, but you end up, you always end up sometimes going to Marks & Spencers and you have to buy a bag just to take whatever you bought home you know?
Interviewer: And how often does this happen?
Participant: How often do I have to buy a bag?
Interviewer: Well yeah, maybe, probably, or how many bags…
Participant: I’d say probably about maybe once, maybe twice a month.
Interviewer: Okay, and that will be how many bags, 1 or 2?
Interviewer: And why do you prefer using those plastic bags for life for your shopping normally…
Participant: As opposed to what?
Interviewer: As opposed to any other types like 5p or bringing your own bags for example?
Participant: Well the bag for life one’s good because they’re sturdier, they’re thicker so I always find that when I buy, when I use the what do you call it, the one use bag by the time I get home if you’ve got any, if you’ve bought like sort of a box of teabags or a plastic carton and it’s got a sharp edge on it, by the time it goes in the car, sits in the back seat of the car or on the floor in the car, there’s a hole in it and it’s just ready for the bin, now the fact Tesco bags are thinner now than they were before and yet they’re charging more, they’re charging now for them, it used to be a heavier duty plastic I think than they are now you know, but I suppose.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important it is to have plastic bags available in supermarkets?
Participant: In supermarkets?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: Well I suppose it is handy but ideally people should be trained, have the mind-set to you know, if they’re going to go shopping they should always bring their own bags with them, which the majority of people do do, but you tend to find there’s a, you tend to find the young guys and workers don’t bring their own bags to supermarkets, I see it regularly and they go out with like sort of like bottles in their pockets and whatever, anything like that, because they’ve not got enough space you know, but yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think would happen if the bags were completely gone from supermarkets, you know I mean the plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, well that’d be good, I would, well I mean the thing is for a period, I’m going back to Tesco again, Tesco stopped using bags altogether and they never kept them on the till, I always shop on the what do you call it, on the do it yourself tills and for months when they first introduced the 5p, I don’t know, have they got the 5p tax down in England?
Interviewer: Not yet, it’s just coming up and Wales has, we are in Wales, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, right, okay, sorry, yeah, you’re in Cardiff of course aren’t you, yeah, well when it was first introduced there was no what do you call it, these automated tills where you checked your own what do you call it, food through, where the bags were situated they removed the bags, totally, and what they said was if you needed a bag you’d to say to the girl who works the computer, “do you have a bag?”, and they’d give you a bag, and they do that in Asda but in Tesco they’ve now brought the bags back on to these automated units again, so whether they’re getting a cut, I know the 5p is meant to go to environmental issues but whether Tescos get 2p or 3p off it I don’t know, but Tescos have put the bags back on again, unless maybe it’s because the staff were getting the run-around because you’ve got 10 tills, if you’ve got 10 tills and there’s 6 folk saying, “can I get a bag, can I get a bag”, you know, and you have to process the what do you call it, if you’re over 25 for drinks and whatever, they’ve decided to put the bags back on the what do you call it, on the tills again, which, which defeats the purpose really because ideally you know, they’ve said there’s a 5p bag tax and if you want to make everybody use their own bags the fact they’ve got them sitting there every day in life people you now, what’s 5p, 5p is nothing really, but it’s making people buy more bags instead of recycling, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, interesting indeed, okay, and when have you heard about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: When it was introduced in Scotland last year, it was last year sometimes, early last year, I think, I can’t remember the exact date off the top of my head, but in Scotland it was widespread you know, it was a national, it was major news so, hello are you still there?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Participant: I thought I was losing you there.
Interviewer: No, that’s fine.
Participant: No, so yeah, it was a national story you know, Scotland was the first, one of the first ones to start charging for bags, the only downside of the bag thing of course is when you go into a shop and you go into a shop to buy clothes you have to pay for a bag there as well, which is ridiculous you know, because you go and buy, you go to Harvey Nichols and say you wanted to maybe £200 £300 bag even though you get your wee bag, your designer bag, you’re still having to pay 5p for it you know, it seems stupid you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and what do you think about, well precisely in England this is what is going to happen, in England it will be a partial application, so what they will introduce is that big supermarkets charge and who doesn’t charge is medium-to-small retailers and corner shops and also clothing shops and also takeaways, so what do you think about that, the fact that these guys will not charge 5p for their bags?
Participant: Well I think that’s correct, I mean I don’t, I mean you’re saying take-away, I don’t think takeaways in Scotland charge because I mean they can hardly say “here’s your 2 containers of rice and your 2 Indians but have you go your own bag?”, if not you’re going to charge 5p, I think what do you call it, because I don’t think in Scotland, any time I’ve had a carry out, a take-away I don’t think I’ve ever been charged 5p, but the shops do charge for bags, I know that, and if England, well, of course again you don’t want to upset the population of England do they, that’s typical, let’s do it in Scotland first but Scotland, it’s the Scottish Government that came forward with this, it’s not a national, a UK wide thing, Scotland led with it so I suppose England don’t like to rock the boat so much do they, so.
Interviewer: So do you think, because in Wales we also have a complete you know, the charges should be applied everywhere so every single bag, paper, plastic, whatever material, every single bag is charged here, so you know, in England they will have this exemption from the charge, so those shops that I’ve mentioned and also biodegradable and paper bags are not going to be charged, so do you think it’s, like considering the overall UK situation or just the situation with the bags, do you think it’s the right thing to do to exempt you know, those shops and those bags from the charges?
Participant: No, I think if you’re going to have a what do you call it, if you’re trying to change the mind-set of everybody in the UK to recycle and reuse you surely have to do it across the board, I mean as I said I can see the takeaways not charging for it but shops as well, I mean why should Scotland have to, if you want to go into maybe say British Home Stores or Marks & Spencers you have to pay for your bag but down in England you don’t, 60 miles down the road when you get into Berwick you don’t pay for it, it’s, I mean it’s not the money thing it’s just the fact that what do you call it, why are you not putting that law across you know, that any bag that’s being bought now, because they’re trying to stop putting bags into landfills because that’s where the majority of them just go isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, yeah, true, and how do you think plastic bags are usually reused by people?
Participant: How many are reused?
Interviewer: Yeah, what do you think people do with the plastic bags after they buy them, well apart from shopping?
Participant: Well apart from me, mine just go in the boot of my car every day till they break, till they rip.
Interviewer: Do you reuse them for any other purposes than shopping, yours?
Participant: Not really, maybe, no, no I don’t, because I’ve got big, I’ve got black bins bags for say the things, like putting things in the garage and whatever, I don’t use, and as I say the other bins for the refuse so like the litter bin sort of thing, but no, I don’t use them for anything else because the reason now is, I mean in days gone by when you didn’t get charged for bags you could have 50 or 60 bags in the house you know, and you put them in a big carrier bag and you stuck them in the garage, I mean I’ve got, we have a place near where I live and it’s a bookshop which is like for charity, and what they’re saying, what they keep appealing for it if anybody’s got extra carrier bags can you bring them in because if people buy 3 or 4 books you know, where I stay it’s a tourist area so there’s a lot of visitors so they don’t want to be walking along with books in their hand, so in days gone by there was never a problem because you could, folk could go up to Tescos and take maybe 10. 12 bags and just walk out the shop with them, they didn’t really care, whereas now there’s a shortage of bags, which is good, which is good for us you know, it’s good for the, well you don’t see so many bags lying about the place and I used to see bin bags, black bags, Tescos and Asdas and whatever all blowing about and stuck to the fences and whatever, now there’s, there’s a shortage of that now which means something must be working.
Interviewer: Absolutely, yeah, so for yourself personally has the introduction of this 5p charge changed your bag use?
Participant: It’s not changed my values because 5p is nothing, it’s not really, it’s never going to affect me 5p, but it’s just the fact, what do you call it, that you’re doing something for the environment, whether your bit your doing is enough but you’re helping you know?
Interviewer: So have you reduced you know, the plastic bags that you used to take from the shops after the charge was introduced?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, as I say I’m lucky if I use maybe once, twice, I mean if, I could, I mean example, last week I went in my lunchtime I went down to the, what do you call it, to Asda and I went to buy one thing, that’s all I had in my mind was to buy one thing, I thought, right I’ll go in, I’ll buy it and I’ll come back and I got side-tracked, my wife phoned and said, “where are?”, I said, “I’m in Asda”, “can you get this, can you get that?”, and I’d no bag and I thought I could put the stuff down, go back out to the car park, get the bag, bring it back in again and I thought, why, that’s the occasions when I will buy a bag because you’ve bought more than you expected you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and was it easy for you to adapt to the charge when it came?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, no problem.
Interviewer: And quick as well?
Participant: Quick, oh yeah, I mean these things they happen overnight so you’ve just got to accept it you know, I mean okay maybe the first couple of days you kept forgetting to take your bag, well you probably didn’t have so many bags for life in these days because the one use bags were so accessible, whereas once the charge did come in you said well we better buy a couple of what do you call it, bag for lives and just keep them in the car, never used to keep bags in the car at all, but now the car, we’ve always got bags in the car now you know, for that reason.
Interviewer: And do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in the UK, or in Scotland if you prefer?
Participant: In Scotland, oh yeah, in Scotland yeah, I mean it’s, people have got used to that now, they’re grown accustomed to it, that’s what happened you know, yeah, I mean people they know the reasons behind what do you call it, the increased, the free bags, they know the reason why, they end up just lying at the side of the roads and everywhere and now you hardly see any, you do still see litter but you don’t see plastic bags nowadays, they only thins occasionally you’ll see a McDonald’s wrapper you know, but yeah, Scotland’s taken it on board you know, and it’s, I mean okay, it’s only a nation of 5 million I suppose so it’s harder to get through to 60 million in England isn’t it?
Interviewer: And you know compared to other types of charges how does plastic bag look like, sorry, plastic bag charge looks like, so for example if we compare this to fuel, charges on fuel, so the prices of fuel going up for the environmental reasons, how does that you know, compared to the plastic bag charge in your opinion?
Participant: Well fuel prices are determined by the government so it’s tax on that whereas it’s for a totally different reason, that’s to make money for the what do you call, it, the government, whereas the money that’s raised from bags, plastic bags in Scotland doesn’t go into the government’s economy, it’s handed out for environmental issues.
Interviewer: And you personally in charge, sorry, too many interviews today, are you personally in favour of higher fuel duties for environmental reasons?
Participant: No, no the fact that the prices are coming down at this moment in time is fantastic. I drive about 250 miles a week so I put in about £25, £30 of petrol a week so it’s, a couple of months, a couple of years ago you were putting in maybe £50 a week because your petrol was up to 135p a litre whereas now it’s down to 106p, 107p, it’s good, yeah, can’t complain about that but that’s because of the price of the oil and nothing to do with what do you call it, the government.
Interviewer: Yeah, but if government decided to put the petrol prices up for the environmental reasons would you agree with that?
Participant: No, for environmental reasons?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t know, no, I wouldn’t still, no, no I don’t see why they’re, the thing is would they actually put the money the money towards the environmental, that’s why they, they say they put the price up, the money they put tax on petrol is to maintain roads and whatever but I don’t, it doesn’t happen here you know, maybe on the motorways down South but now on what do you call it, not up in Scotland.
Interviewer: And how about another type of charge which is, doesn’t really exist in the UK but it exists in other places like in Germany and Austria, they have a little deposit that they pay for bottled, plastic bottle drinks and like small packaging things, so basically when they buy it they put this small deposit with the price and when they come to bring to the store they get the deposit back…
Participant: They get money back?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Oh right, that used to happen, that used to happen in Scotland many, years and years ago, but it’s funny you’re just mentioning hat just now because I was just talking to one of my colleagues and there’s a drink called Irn-Bru, heard of it?
Interviewer: Yeah, I know, yeah.
Participant: Right, okay, Irn-Bru, there’s a guy who drinks, it’s a friend of his, who drinks Irn-Bru every day in life and Irn-Bru is sold in glass bottles in Scotland, you get it plastic down South or anywhere else as well, but they have in glass, and he takes the bottles he buys it in glass bottles and he gets 30p deposit on every bottle.
Interviewer: Nowadays?
Participant: That’s what he gets now, yeah, and what happens is he raises £1000 a year from the deposit of bottles and he gives it to the local hospice in Strathcarron in Falkirk and Barrs as deciding as from next month they’re going to stop making Irn-Bru in glass bottles, so the guy’s saying, “how am I going to raise money for the hospice?”, because they stopped doing it, I mean the thing is I’ve never heard of plastic bottles being, what do you all it, recycled again and get money back, I know years ago they used to have glass bottles and you always took them back and you got 10p or whatever for a bottle, but I’ve never heard of taking plastic bottles back.
Interviewer: It doesn’t exist but it exists in other countries, so we were wondering…
Participant: Yeah, oh yeah I know, I wasn’t aware of that, oh well…
Interviewer: What do you think if that was introduced you know?
Participant: Well that would be good you know, because basically you’re just putting your plastic bottles into, what do you call it, the recycling bins that we have and then, well who knows what happens to them, they’re supposedly meant to go, you hear stories that not everything you put in the recycling bin actually goes to get recycled you know, so.
Interviewer: Okay, we’re nearly there so just to ask a couple of questions…
Participant: Are we, oh good, I’m needing a cup of coffee but I’m sitting in my car here at the moment just so I’ve got peace and quiet.
Interviewer: Yeah, getting there, so how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: I am, I am to a point, I’m not a green, a real green person you know, I’m not a tree grabber or whatever, but it’s, yeah, I mean the things is you know, you hear about the climate change and all these things but you’re not going to stop it you know, it’s up to America and China to get their act together before we can stop climate change, anything that I’m going to do is never going to help but it’s, and your carbon footprint and whatever, trying to do, well I do on occasions because I think that was part of your questionnaire when it said, “do you make unnecessary trips?”, and I don’t really, in the past I probably would, I’d probably go up to Tescos maybe or go into town maybe twice a day, Tesco maybe 3, 4 times in the one day, oh I forgot this, I’ll just go back up, whereas now you’ll say there’s no need you know, so yeah, I mean petrol wise, economy wise and petrol I don’t drive as far as I should but that’s not just because of the petrol prices, just because there’s no need you know, you sometimes tend to forget that but I really don’t have a major strong issue on the environmental really, I mean I probably should have more but I don’t.
Interviewer: So what would you potentially change if you could you know, in your skills and your knowledge, whatever, just things that you do for the environmental, would there be anything that you would be you know, considering potentially changing or thinking of?
Participant: Well, I probably should have solar power energy.
Interviewer: And would it be something that you would be ready to do?
Participant: No, no, I should probably have but I’ve not and now it’s too late to buy it now because the government’s lowered the rate for subsidies, yeah, not subsidies actually just, what do you call it, the money you’re going to get now per kilowatt is now, they’ve dropped it from like it was 13p or 14p a kilowatt about 3 years ago, now it’s going to be down to about 1.5p now, so that makes it pointless really to have solar power which is, as I said I do turn lights and that off in the houses so I mean I am, but that’s just probably maybe just concerning you, and just making sure your bills are not as high as they should be you know, because not necessarily conserving, thinking about the environment, I think that’s it really, there’s not that, I probably don’t do enough for the environment you know, I do grow plants and I’ve got conifers in the back garden so they’re photosynthesis or whatever it is, giving out carbon dioxide, so, yeah, but that’s about it really, honestly.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the household waste, do you recycle at all?
Participant: Recycle everything, well I don’t know where you are but beside us there used to be one bin for glass and tins and garden waste and the other bin was just solely for what do you call it, going to landfill, your household waste, whereas now they’ve introduced, I’ve got 4 bins, I think I showed that on one of my photographs, I’ve got the 4 bins, I put it together, I had bottles on its own, they have a bin for garden, a bin for household waste and another tackling bin which takes plastic, papers, tins and cardboard, so…
Interviewer: And is that for the individual household or is that…
Participant: Individual, well I won a detached house so that’s individual household, so what happens now is everything I use, every wrap, they don’t take plastic bags like you know, or like if you’ve got the cellophane on like a sort of Marks & Spencers meal, you take the cellophane off, that goes in your household waste because they don’t take flimsy plastic but they take the containers, so everything, everything goes into the recycling bin, and my household waste bin now, which used to be full after about 4 or 5, well we used to, we used to have our household waste picked up every week and then it not to 2 weeks and the bin was always full, now after 2 weeks it’s only half full because the majority of it was filled with bottles, plastic bottles, cardboards, so that’s good, that’s good that fact that, I do, I’m a dedicated recycler of household waste., I give my wife a row for putting things in the bin when I see it, she shouldn’t be.
Interviewer: Yeah, very good, and compared to other issues in modern society such a you know, social, economic health, how important the environment is for you?
Participant: Pretty low down.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: Pretty low, pretty low.
Interviewer: Sorry, I didn’t understand?
Participant: Right, like with other matters like poverty, fuel you know, I think environment for me is about, if you’re talking about 10 being the op, most important, I’d say about 3.
Interviewer: And why is it less important that some other issues?
Participant: Well I mean environment, I mean okay right, people, there’s people on the streets who don’t have jobs, who don’t have a home, a home over their heads, roof over their heads, these things are more important, giving to charities for people who are, what do you call it you know, like i.e. Save the Children and whatever for the Syrian refugees and whatever, I think the fact that you’re you know, okay as I say I do recycle, what do you call it, my household waste but the environment, and when there’s issues, there’s major other issues in the world the environment doesn’t really come into it really, for me, personally, I know you know, if , I suppose yesterday they said that you know, there’s less fish in the sea now that there was 10 years ago but I mean that’s just because the fishermen are getting to fishing in larger areas sort of thing you know, and taking all the stock, I mean you can’t help that, that’s not the environment, some will say like the environment in the Barrier Reef you know, climate change is affecting what do you call it, you know, all the lovely fish that you can find at the Barrier Reef, but it’s not affecting the stocks of haddock and cod which have been, from being over fished, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and how about things like you know, in some places in the world things like climate change and basically environmental issues come so close that actually they start to affect you know, either people’s health or people’s safety and things like that, so it touches immediately you know, on all the other aspects of their lives, obviously it doesn’t yet that much in the UK but…
Participant: In the UK, oh I know, and for other countries in China and whatever and part of America yeah, you watch these programmes on China and you see the what do you call it, the smog that hangs around these cities there because of the, what do you call it, because of the population as well, but yeah, I mean it is concerning but again it’s, you could say NIMBYism, it’s not in my back door sort of thing you know, one day it will! I work less than 2 miles from Grangemouth Petrochemical Plant which is anything happened in that plant in the next 5 minutes or the next minute, I wouldn’t be talking to you, because it would explode and the fall out, the drop out zone’s about 10 miles you know, it’s like that fire that happened down South, down in England a few months back there you know, the explosion’s like an atomic bomb sort of thing you know…
Interviewer: Yeah, I know, I hope it never happens.
Participant: …and they keep pumping out, you keep seeing all these gases getting, well they’re getting vaporised, they’re getting burnt off as the oil comes into what do you call it, Grangemouth and you say, oh, but it’s keeping people, it’s keeping 3,000 people in work you know, you’ve got to balance it haven’t you you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, [?? 49:54]
Participant: But I don’t live in Grangemouth so I’m quite happy, I live in South Queensferry which is quite nice and I’ve got three bridges to look at and I’m right on the seafront sort of thing, so there you go.
Interviewer: Right…
Participant: Okay?
Interviewer: …well thank you very much Ian.
Participant: Is that me, good.