Interviewer: OK thank you. There will be no personal quotes, in any case. So how did you find the diary-filling experience overall?
Participant: It was all right, it was a lot easier than what I thought it would be, and [?? 00:19] I thought it’d be like painstaking kind of process. But no, it was all right.
Interviewer: Did you find anything easy or difficult in particular?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Was there anything that you kind of struggled to write down?
Participant: Well, trying to think of everything I’ve spent on for that day was a bit, because I travel to work as well, so trying to remember fuel is, because my memory’s not brilliant.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you at all in the diary?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Anything else that you would like to add to these questions or…?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Then probably the next set of questions that I wanted to ask you about is basically your shopping routine, we discussed quite a bit in the diary, so can I ask you to describe, in your own words, your typical food shopping trip. What is it like?
Participant: Um, can’t really put it into words.
Interviewer: Well just tell a little bit about your, you know, what is your food shopping trip like, where do you go and, you know, how often, what kind of supermarkets would you buy, things like that.
Participant: Oh right, so well we do most of our food shopping from ASDA, that’s me and my partner, we usually go three times a week, possibly.
Interviewer: Three times?
Participant: Three times a week, yeah, she goes to ASDA most, and I’m just sat at home looking after the little one. But yeah, three times a week usually. That’s like essentials, like bread, milk, and we get other stuff like freezer stuff, tinned stuff and cereal, and stuff like that.
Interviewer: Is there a main shop in those three times, or is it kind of spread out?
Participant: It’s kind of, yeah, it’s kind of spread out.
Interviewer: And do you always go to the ASDA you mentioned? Or do you go to different supermarkets and shops?
Participant: We mostly go to ASDA. Sometimes she’ll pop to a Lidl or Aldi, one of them. It’s not that far from ASDA.
Interviewer: And why is it ASDA that you chose mainly for your shopping?
Participant: I think it’s mostly convenience, because it’s not that far away, right. Quite cheap in there, so…
Interviewer: And the other two shops that you’ve mentioned, Lidl and Aldi, why those two?
Participant: Because some of the stuff in there you can get cheaper than in ASDA. Not everything but most of the stuff. But we just go in there for like our snacky things like biscuits and crisps.
Interviewer: So do those kind of things cost cheaper in Lidl and Aldi as compared to ASDA?
Participant: Yeah, they do.
Interviewer: And would you sort of see Lidl or ASDA as your main shop or not?
Participant: ASDA is our main shop.
Interviewer: And what would be the difference, you know, why is it in particular ASDA and not the other two?
Participant: Because ASDA’s got a lot more.
Interviewer: I see. Is that choice-wise?
Participant: Choice-wise, yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Well we just look and see what we’re running low on, and do it that way.
Interviewer: Do you take a list with you?
Participant: Usually, yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you sort of compose the list?
Participant: I would just, while we’re looking round, see that we’re low on say milk, so we write down milk. But if we haven’t got any of something, we’ll write that down as well.
Interviewer: When choosing food, what is important to you?
Participant: With regards to food?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well, bread, milk are the main ones, we get meat in as well, like chicken or we get some beef in as well, sausages, and meal stuff as well like chips and pasta.
Interviewer: But what I mean, when you choose food, what is kind of, how to say, how do you select your food in terms of not the items but when you select particular like types of meat, for example, or this or that, what in particular is important to you, what criteria sort of…?
Participant: Oh right, the quality of it, I always go when we do shop for meat because I’ve done catering, so I know what to look for, quality-wise, and [?? 06:44]. Because usually we buy, like, fresh.
Interviewer: And how do you determine quality?
Participant: The quality, well the way I determine it is the amount of fat in it or I look at the fibres of the cuts of meat, if there’s any brown bits, I won’t go for, that kind of stuff.
Interviewer: And what is less important when choosing food for yourself?
Participant: Less important would be, well the snacky things really.
Interviewer: The what, sorry?
Participant: Don’t know. Sorry, I’ve not really woken up, so… What like criteria less important?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Is there anything else like you would not really look at?
Participant: Yeah, I’m not particularly fussed about brands, brand names.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I just see it as that’s what you’re paying for, it’s the name of the brand, whereas you can get something exactly the same under a different name that’s cheaper, so…
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to the store?
Participant: We usually go in my partner’s car.
Interviewer: And does it happen you walk to your supermarkets or is it always car?
Participant: It’s always car.
Interviewer: And, yeah?
Participant: It’s not close enough to walk.
Interviewer: Right, how far is it from where you live?
Participant: About three miles?
Interviewer: These shopping trips, are they usually done on purpose or…?
Participant: Yeah, on purpose, yeah.
Interviewer: So you just go to your particular supermarket and then…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …come back?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Does this happen to you to do this on the way somewhere else or not really?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: And when you go shopping with your partner, how do you co-ordinate who buys what? Do you walk together through the shop or do you just decide you get this, I get that?
Participant: Oh yeah, we’ll walk together.
Interviewer: And also you know, regarding the food that you buy, how much would you say goes to waste maybe per week or per month?
Participant: I’m not sure, I know we’re pretty good with food waste, we don’t seem to waste that much.
Interviewer: And how do you manage to sort of not to waste?
Participant: Well usually we just see what’s, see what’s about to go and then use it like that day. So say something goes out tomorrow, we’ll use it today, kind of thing.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you would like to add to your shopping routine?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: The next thing I wanted to ask you about is slightly unusual, so it’s like a next set of questions that we’re moving to, and could you tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag. What does it make you think of?
Participant: Supermarket plastic bag?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Um, that makes me think of shopping, of the supermarket brand that’s on the bag, we reuse a lot of the bags anyway.
Interviewer: You reuse…?
Participant: We reuse the plastic bags, yeah. I don’t know, that’s it really. I can’t think of any more.
Interviewer: And do you remember that point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Oh no. I must have been very, very, very little. But no.
Interviewer: Have you seen the times without bags or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: You haven’t witnessed those?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags do you yourself use to pack your shopping?
Participant: Well we usually, for like heavy stuff we get the Bags for Life ones, and we take those back, we use those, but then just use the bog-standard plastic ones for the light stuff.
Interviewer: For the lighter stuff?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of Bags for Life do you have?
Participant: It’s the ASDA, it’s still plastic but it’s like hardened or whatever, stronger plastic Bag for Life thing.
Interviewer: Is that sort of woven plastic, something like that or not? Or is it just the thicker than…?
Participant: No, it’s just…
Interviewer: Or laminated?
Participant: It’s like a laminated…
Interviewer: Laminated, yeah. And are they kind of big size those?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how many of those do you bring with you when you go food shopping?
Participant: I usually take a couple of them, I think.
Interviewer: And did you also mention, it’s a little bit quiet so there are some things that I do not manage to hear very well. You also mentioned that you use single use bags sometimes?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: You take the free bags from supermarkets, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And is there a reason for why you do that?
Participant: Just because, well they’re, you don’t have to pay for them. But we reuse them around the house anyway.
Interviewer: And how do you reuse them?
Participant: Like, for like our bin in the bedroom, we’ve only got like a little bin, we use one of those in there. If we needed to carry other stuff like in our cupboards, clothes and stuff.
Interviewer: So would you say that you need them at home?
Participant: Not really need need them, no.
Interviewer: And then coming back to Bags for Life, would you say that you have sufficient number of those at home for your shopping or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, well for our shopping, yeah.
Interviewer: So you could bring more than you usually bring and avoid single use bags or not really? I’m just trying to check whether I’m understanding correctly or not.
Participant: No, I reckon if we got maybe a couple more of them we could use those instead of the single use ones.
Interviewer: But do you physically have them or not?
Participant: No, we only have a couple.
Interviewer: Now I understand, yeah, thank you.
Participant: All right.
Interviewer: What do you think about these thin bags, are they convenient, are they to your liking…?
Participant: Yeah, I think they are, definitely.
Interviewer: What is it that you like about them?
Participant: What the thin ones, the free ones?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: Just convenience, they’re there and they’re free, so…
Interviewer: And where do you store the Bags for Life that you have at home?
Participant: We’ve got a little like cupboard under the stairs, so we put them in there, and we take them out when we go shopping.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you, let’s say, how do you plan on taking those with you when you go food shopping?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Well, when you go food shopping, you need to, presumably, remember to take them, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So does this always go to the plan or not?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to forget to take them?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And how many free bags do you usually take, let’s say, a week or a month from a supermarket?
Participant: So weekly I’d say maybe six or seven.
Interviewer: Six or seven?
Participant: Mmm.
Interviewer: A week, yeah? And how many of those do you reckon you currently have at home?
Participant: Oh well I don’t know, quite a few.
Interviewer: Just roughly, maybe.
Participant: I don’t know, I’d say maybe 20, like, I don’t know, 24 or something, probably.
Interviewer: And in your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it is very important, yes, makes carrying things a helluva lot easier.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores? How would you find it?
Participant: I think I’d be a bit annoyed.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I wouldn’t, especially if you’re doing quite a large shop, then how else are you supposed to carry your stuff back to your car or even if other people who are walking home from the stores, how are they supposed to carry it all? So…
Interviewer: Do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No? It is, yeah, just for a matter of information because we’ll be talking about it afterwards. This is national charge of 5p, five pence, for a single use plastic carrier bag, so those that are currently free in supermarkets, yeah?
Participant: OK.
Interviewer: And this charge exists, you know, in other parts of the UK already, not in England yet, and have you ever heard about this before, or not?
Participant: I’ve noticed the, I think it was Trago’s, down here, Trago’s, they charge for bags, the single use ones.
Interviewer: But you haven’t heard really about, you know…?
Participant: No, I haven’t heard about it as a…
Interviewer: As a national…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …charge? Yeah, OK. What do you think about this 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s all right if, say if someone’s not buying a lot, say they’ve got one item, and then they put it in a bag and, yeah, maybe charge for it. But if they’ve got quite a bit, I think if there was like a limit, I don’t know, say five, six items, and then give the bag for free kind of thing, so…
Interviewer: And do you find introduction of this charge surprising at all?
Participant: A little bit surprising, yeah.
Interviewer: And why is it surprising?
Participant: Because I’ve always known them as free, free bags, yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think is good about it, and what is not as good, just…?
Participant: I suppose in a good way, people might start reusing the bags, so it won’t get thrown away as much and filling up our landfills. But there will be a lot of complaints.
Interviewer: So what would be not so good about it?
Participant: Well the complaints of people…
Interviewer: About?
Participant: …about the charge, yeah, about having to pay more money.
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p charge is going to be introduced in England, I’m sorry to say, just in about a week’s time?
Participant: Oh is it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Oh, OK.
Interviewer: You haven’t heard about this yet?
Participant: No, I haven’t heard anything about it.
Interviewer: Have you noticed any, well obviously you say you haven’t, but did you notice anything in supermarkets, any adverts or…?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, nothing about this, yeah?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Because some people that we’ve interviewed, they’ve mentioned that adverts were already present in, and I think in ASDA’s, in particular.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, I believe so. So you haven’t seen anything?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And what do you think, personally, what do you think are the main purposes of such a charge?
Participant: I think the main purpose of it is to get people recycling. I mean, you wouldn’t want to spend extra money every time you go to the supermarket, so maybe they would get the Bag for Life and reuse those instead.
Interviewer: And do you think there are any kind of environmental purposes of anything like that?
Participant: Oh yeah, so instead of the, the single use ones just being thrown in the bin, people start reusing and so reducing waste that’s going to our landfills and stuff.
Interviewer: And do you think that plastic bag charge will fulfil these purposes?
Participant: I think it will do. It might take time, but I think it will.
Interviewer: Why do you think it will?
Participant: Because people wouldn’t want to spend every, every time going to the shop, spending more money, they’d go for the Bags for Life, which, in the long run, will work out cheaper for them anyway, and reuse those.
Interviewer: And do you think that the introduction of this 5p charge will affect you personally or not?
Participant: Well it might do, I might buy a couple more Bags for Life, so, and use those instead.
Interviewer: So rather than paying 5p…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …you will just get a lot. How much cost the Bags for Life that you have, if you remember?
Participant: I think those cost us 45p, I believe?
Interviewer: And well, obviously we don’t know yet how this will happen, but how quickly do you think you will be able to adapt to the charge?
Participant: I think quite quickly, yeah, within a couple of food shops.
Interviewer: And do you reckon it can change your shopping behaviour at all, or not?
Participant: Probably not the, my shopping behaviour, no.
Interviewer: And do you think it is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person or not really?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: In what respect?
Participant: In not throwing our bags away.
Interviewer: And you also mentioned, you know, that you reuse those bags at home…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …I forgot to ask at that point, you know, when you use them as bin liners, do you also buy bin liners in addition, like bags, black bags or anything like that or…?
Participant: Yeah, we buy black bags for our main bin in the kitchen, the little ones as little bins.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any other changes after the charge is introduced, or not?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Any changes, you know, in terms of, I don’t know, in your local area, in your country?
Participant: I can’t think of any, no.
Interviewer: And what do you think about, you know, how currently bag reuse is encouraged in the country? Is it encouraged at all in your opinion, or not?
Participant: Well I think it is, they’ve got signs up and that in ASDA, so they’re doing all they can, but it’s up to the people as well. So…
Interviewer: And do you think anything should change in this respect at all, or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: And regarding the Bags for Life, why do you think they have been given this name?
Participant: Why’ve they what?
Interviewer: Bags for Life, why do you think they have been given this name, why are they called Bags for Life?
Participant: Well because you keep them for life, they keep reusing them instead of the single use ones.
Interviewer: And what do you think, how people sort of use these bags, does this match the name?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, because they’re using it, because I’ve seen quite a few people reuse them in ASDA, you know, to carry their shopping, so I think they do, yeah.
Interviewer: Another question I wanted to ask you about the charge is, you know when the charge comes into effect in England, there will be some types of bags and some types of shops where the charge will not apply, and these things, these cases will be medium to small retailers and corner shops, as well as hot food takeaways and clothing shops. So these will not charge for the bags.
Participant: OK.
Interviewer: The 5p ones. And also things like very little transparent bags that you can find in veg, fruit and veg and bakery shelves…
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: …as well as paper and biodegradable bags, which will also be exempt from the charge. So I just wanted to ask what you think about this?
Participant: Well I think that’s all right, yeah, the little corner shops and stuff, definitely, and clothes shops. So yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you think it is all right?
Participant: Because it’s just convenience, that’s why they’re there anyway, just pop round the corner, it wouldn’t be, I don’t know, wouldn’t be right to charge, I don’t know, just for convenience really [?? 27:06].
Interviewer: And how does that differ from supermarkets?
Participant: Well supermarkets you buy a lot more, so, and because the corner shops don’t have any other like the Bags for Life thing. Because some people will use those when they do shop in their locals.
Interviewer: And the types of bags that I’ve mentioned, how about those not being charged 5p? The paper and biodegradable and the very small plastic, transparent plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, [?? 27:51] definitely the biodegradable ones, because they’re not really harming the environment that much, but the, well, and the little plastic ones as well, for fruit and veg, I suppose that’s all right. Because I know some, some fruit and veg, most of them have a skin on it anyway, so you can put it in a normal bag.
Interviewer: I also wanted to ask you to compare plastic bag charge to two other types of charges. The first one is higher fuel duties, so for instance, for environmental reasons there would be a decision to slightly raise or raise the prices of fuel to discourage people from, let’s say, driving too much, when they can use other types of transport sometimes, what do you think about this? How does this compare to plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, it’s hard because I usually just drive, well my partner drives, so I don’t know, it would be kind of hard to get, all the buses would fill up, and if everyone does their main shop and then jumps on a bus, it’s going to be a bit awkward.
Interviewer: Well it’s not only, I’m not necessarily only talking about food shops here, but any kind of trips that people make.
Participant: Oh right, so, well even still, the buses would still fill up whether they’re popping to town or whether they are going to the shop. So we’d have to have more buses on the road essentially.
Interviewer: So would you agree with the fuel price rise for environmental reasons or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: And another type of charge, which is actually not quite a charge, it’s a little deposit that exists in Germany and in Austria when people buy plastic, drinks bottled in plastic, so like coke and things like that…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …they pay a little deposit in at the time of buying. And when they bring the bottle back, they get the deposit, what do you think about that?
Participant: That sounds all right, it’ll encourage people to, because I’m guessing, when you bring them back they’ll take them off to recycling?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah.
Participant: So the people who don’t particularly recycle, I suppose it’s all right yeah.
Interviewer: Would you imagine in particular having this on the streets, so something like that, like that’s apparently how it exists in Germany, you can basically bring, put your plastic, you know, like in TV shows, little plastic, coke bottles into the machine and get the deposit back, what do you think about that, would that work?
Participant: I think it would work, especially in the big towns, the cities. So down here our biggest one is Truro, well Exeter, nearest proper city is Truro, and I think it would work in a place like that, yeah.
Interviewer: And how about, you know, doing this at home, do you think people will be, well, sort of diligent enough to bring it from home to recycle in the shops or…?
Participant: I’m not sure, I don’t think, I think some people would do it, but most people probably won’t. Round here I don’t see a lot of recycle boxes go out.
Interviewer: We’ll speak about recycling in a minute, yeah.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And, you know, also do you think this sort of, this sort of charge might stop people from buying plastic bottled drinks or not?
Participant: I think some people will stay away from it, but most people go for it.
Interviewer: And just the last question now about these kind of things, what do you think will happen in about 10 years’ time, you know, now the charge is going to come into effect in England, but, you know, it will be like a whole UK charge because it already exists in Wales and in Scotland and in Ireland, so what do you think might happen at the country level in about 10 years’ time as a result of it?
Participant: Well I can see the charge happening to corner shops, they’ll move it to corner shops and stuff. They might even maybe increase the charge as well.
Interviewer: The corner shops or the general…?
Participant: Just general.
Interviewer: Just a general increase. So you think it will be become more, higher sort of charge than 5p yeah?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And then the other kind of impacts would you imagine could happen?
Participant: I could imagine a lot of people buying the reusable bags.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, as you mentioned, yeah.
Participant: As a way of saving money and helping the environment.
Interviewer: Fantastic, thank you very much. So we’ll just move to the kind of last set of questions, and I wanted to ask you if you tend to save water and energy at home.
Participant: What was that sorry?
Interviewer: If you tend to save water and energy at home.
Participant: Like, it’s how I would or…?
Interviewer: Yeah, if you save, do you save water and energy at home?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah we do.
Interviewer: Could you give a few examples please?
Participant: Like with electric, we always turn the plugs off and unplug things when we’re not using them and with regards to water as well, we turn it off when we’re not using it, kind of thing.
Interviewer: And why would you say you do this?
Participant: Mostly to save on bills really.
Interviewer: And do you think this is kind of, it turns out to be efficient?
Participant: Oh yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Do you reuse things at home? You can think about any kind of…?
Participant: Well we reuse our, most of our jars and stuff, because we’ve got a shed out back, so I put my screws and nails and stuff. So we’ve got money jars dotted around as well, so… But we reuse like our plastic bottles as well, we reuse those for drinks, so yeah.
Interviewer: And can we speak now a little bit about the household waste, so what do you usually do about, with the household waste at home?
Participant: Well we’ve got a bin collection every Wednesday, we just pop it out Tuesday night, but yeah, that’s mostly like stuff we can’t recycle, so yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you recycle currently?
Participant: Well we recycle our plastic bottles, glass jars, glass bottles, lots of stuff like that. But we usually take it to, I can’t remember what you call it, like a tip, but they’ve got like a recycling bit…
Interviewer: So it’s not on your doorstep but it’s somewhere you need to bring it to?
Participant: Oh no, no, no. We do have a recycle collection thing but we just find it easier to take it there. It’s not far.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: It’s not that far and ours is every two weeks, and we tend to fill up quite a bit. So just take it there. But we do that say on the way to shopping, because it’s on the way.
Interviewer: And why does your, you know, recycling box fill up so quickly? Why would you say so, is that because of the frequency?
Participant: Yeah, probably because of the frequency yeah. And my partner likes her cokes.
Interviewer: And what would you say about these recycling facilities that you currently have? Are you happy with them or is there anything to improve potentially?
Participant: Well they’re, I reckon the collection one should be a bit more frequent, say once a week like our household waste thing. But when we take it to the tip, we always, we’re always happy with it, so, it’s just somewhere where you can do it whenever you want, so…
Interviewer: And how often do you drive?
Participant: What like in general?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well, so my partner goes to ASDA three times, she’s got the car, and I’ve got a little moped scooter that I go to work on, usually five, six days a week.
Interviewer: And do you or your partner tend to save, you know, these kind of trips and combine trips at all or you don’t really think much about this?
Participant: Well the only combining we do is to the tip to recycle and then to the shop, instead of going to the shop one day and then going to the tip the next day, do it in one. But that’s about it really.
Interviewer: And another question that I wanted to ask is again a little bit purchase-related, do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products or, you know, things like organic foods, sustainable, fair trade, free range kind of things?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And why is that?
Participant: Because they’re priced quite a bit higher, so, just saving money.
Interviewer: So it’s for these kind of reasons mostly yeah?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you, do you support environmental organisations and issues in whichever way, you know, you can think of?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you in general?
Participant: Well it means recycling, just looking, just looking after the environment a little bit better, so not sending so much rubbish to landfill and stuff like that.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about environmental issues, would you say?
Participant: Not that concerned, but I will still recycle.
Interviewer: Yeah, and I know it’s tricky, probably, to answer, but why would you say you recycle?
Participant: Don’t know, I can’t really say, just do.
Interviewer: Well if…?
Participant: Just to help the environment a little bit, just doing my little bit.
Interviewer: So would you say you definitely do it for environmental reasons?
Participant: Yeah, kind of, yeah.
Interviewer: And would you say that the environment is an important part of your identity at all or not?
Participant: Not major part, no.
Interviewer: And why do you think it is not?
Participant: I don’t know. No, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And are you concerned at all about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: Not me particularly, no. I think we’re pretty good.
Interviewer: Why would you say so?
Participant: Because we, I’ve noticed like, quite a few places where, there’s quite a few houses around us have got a lot more bags they send out for the bin men, we only send out two or three bags a week, whereas they’ve got, sometimes almost double that, so…
Interviewer: And, you know, compared to other issues in the modern society, things like, you know, social economic or health kind of issues, how important is environment in that list of, you know, priorities, let’s say.
Participant: I think it is a little bit important, but not so much, because people are all about saving money, like they’d rather save money than think about environment, stuff like that. They’re more thinking about now instead of the future kind of thing, with regards to that.
Interviewer: And when you say it’s a little bit important, what makes it important somehow?
Participant: Well the effect it can have, our environment and in the future. Like with destroying our ozone layer and global warming and stuff, so, but not a lot of people, well I think not a lot of people will think that far ahead in the future kind of thing.
Interviewer: What do you, yourself, think about this kind of [?? 43:20] matters?
Participant: Like, what do you mean?
Interviewer: Well, the fact that you mention them somehow, you know, means that they’ve been, your attention has been drawn to them, so why would you say, I mean, I’m trying to, let me just think how to frame it. Why would you say those issues are important, yeah, things like global warming or climate change?
Participant: I think they’re important because they’re constantly changing our environment, I mean global warming, with the scientists saying, with the ice caps melting, that’s raising the sea levels up, so, it can be a little bit scary if you think too much into it. But, yeah.
Interviewer: And where you live, you mentioned Cornwall right?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is this something that’s, you know, discussed locally, because again, we’re interviewing people from all over the UK, and it’s actually nice because, you know, we can have opinions of people from a little bit everywhere.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Would you say that it is, you know, something that is discussed locally in Cornwall? And is there any, you know, yeah, is there any kind of concern about this at all?
Participant: I think it is, I’ve heard a bit on the news, the local news, and like I said, the supermarkets and stuff with their signs and in the local paper as well, always mentions how important it is to recycle so…
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not really?
Participant: I don’t know, I think there’s more that I should know, but I think I know a bit.
Interviewer: What kind of things you think can be improved in this?
Participant: Well encouraging people to recycle more, so, I don’t know, I think maybe, if they feel that they can benefit more from it, maybe they, that would encourage them to recycle, so, don’t know how but, yeah, something along those lines.
Interviewer: Can you think of anything that could benefit people at the same time as benefitting the environment?
Participant: I’m not sure.
Interviewer: That’s OK, no problem, yeah. And do you feel that people receive enough support to be environmentally friendly in the country, or not?
Participant: Yeah, I think they do, it’s just their choice, and they choose not to, so…
Interviewer: Would you say that anything needs to be, again, improved in terms of support that is given?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: And speaking of yourself, would you say that you are happy with what you are currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I’m happy with what I’m doing, yeah.
Interviewer: And could you say why a little bit?
Participant: Well we’ve, you know, because I recycle most of my stuff, so, or reusing it, so I’m not filling up a lot of bin bags and sending those to the bin men, so…
Interviewer: And would there be anything that you would, you know, potentially like to improve, to do more for the environment or not?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Just maybe the last question that I wanted to ask today, it’s been really interesting, so what would you say is the main, or what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, and what are the aspects that you like about it?
Participant: What do you mean, in terms of what…?
Interviewer: In terms of anything, just thinking about your local area, what are the plusses and minuses basically.
Participant: Well, in our local area, there’s a few parks which is nice, so the land isn’t going to waste, so kids have got something to do, they’re not causing trouble, so… We’ve got a corner shop just up the road, and a fish and chip shop as well, so I’m happy! But no, I don’t think there’s anything I would improve, not really.
Interviewer: Thank you very much, so I’ll probably just, is there anything that you would like to add or to emphasise before we finish?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: OK great, thank you very much.