Interviewer: So as you might be aware, I’m phoning to have a quick interview chat with you about your diary experience…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …and to see if we can discuss some of the things that you talked about and see if you have any questions for us. So this should take about an hour, so will this be a good time for you?
Participant: Yeah, this is fine.
Interviewer: Yeah, lovely stuff. Okay, well if you don’t have any questions before we continue, I think everything…
Participant: No, no questions at all.
Interviewer: No? Good stuff. In that case, could you tell us how you found filling in the diary?
Participant: Yeah, I found it was really easy, very straightforward. I thought that you gave very good directions on how to do it, yeah, and I just quite enjoyed doing it.
Interviewer: You enjoyed it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: That’s what I was hoping for. Is there anything that you found difficult or hard to manage?
Participant: No, no I thought it was really good, it was very easy, it was very well put together, and as I’ve said, the direction was very good on how to do it.
Interviewer: Good stuff, glad to hear. Did you find anything surprising when you were writing in the diary?
Participant: I was a little bit surprised when you know it says what do you notice about your waste, I was quite surprised to see that in the 10 days I hadn’t filled up a general waste bag yet because usually it doesn’t occur to me how long’s gone between, you know, changing them, so that was quite interesting.
Interviewer: So that made you think about the waste?
Participant: Yeah [laughter].
Interviewer: That’s quite alright, oh brilliant. Okay, so I’m just going to talk very quickly now about some of the shopping, your, your normal routines…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …so could you please describe to me your typical shopping trip?
Participant: Well typically we go once a week and we sort of like get everything, you know, tins, frozen, milk, it generally lasts us about a week, but we go to Tesco’s usually because we don’t drive, so it’s easier just to get everything in one place, and yeah, not really sure what else to say about it [laughter].
Interviewer: So it’s about once a week that you go…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …and do a big, main shop?
Participant: Yes that’s right.
Interviewer: Do you do any top up shops? Do you ever grab any little bits?
Participant: Sometimes we’ll buy bread and milk, but just lately, the kids have gone off eating bread and milk so [laughter], so we’ve been buying quite a bit of fruit.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good, and whereabouts is that? Is that a local store or…?
Participant: Usually we buy it in Tesco’s because it generally lasts quite well, like we’ll buy grapes, sometimes bananas, apples, depending on what they’re in the mood for [laughter].
Interviewer: And that’s the same Tesco that you go to for your main shop is it?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Ah that’s great. So why Tesco? It sounds like you go there quite a lot?
Participant: Well we go to Tesco’s because it’s on a public transport route, and with not driving, it’s a bit too far to walk with the bags on the way home, so a bus stop that’s right outside it is really handy for us.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good.
Participant: Yeah, and then it doesn’t stop too far from our house either, so that’s even better.
Interviewer: Yeah, and that’s how you get there is it? You all take the bus?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: I see. Who goes on the shopping trip normally can I ask?
Participant: It’s usually me and my partner, and in the summer holidays we take our children with us, but you know, 99% of the time it’s just me and my partner.
Interviewer: Oh I see, that makes sense, and I don’t want to get too personal, but who pays for the shopping when you go together?
Participant: It comes out of our joint money.
Interviewer: Oh I see right, that makes sense. So it seems like you’re buying a lot of fruit at the moment?
Participant: We have been yeah.
Interviewer: Is there any, apart from the fruit for the kids, it sounds like, is there any sort of food items that you keep an eye out for?
Participant: Not really. We keep an eye out for bargains, like if they’ve got buy one get one free, or two for the price of three, that’s quite handy, like we’ll look out for that like on yogurts and cakes for the kids is quite a good one because when they’re on offer, they’ve usually got a good date, so you can buy a few packs and then leave them in the cupboard for the coming weeks. So we quite like to do that, same with tins as well, if there’s an offer on on the tins, you can buy quite a few and then they last you for a few weeks. So we’ve found that’s been quite cost economic.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it sounds like there’s quite a lot of preparation involved, like buying things for a long time?
Participant: It’s not too bad, we’re not as bad as some people, but I always find it pays to sort of, if you can, buy it in advance, you know, especially if there’s an offer on because you know what it’s like, some weeks you’ll find there’s an unexpected bill or something [laughter].
Interviewer: Yeah that’s true. So your priority would be about getting good value for money?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: That makes sense. Oh sorry I had a question in my mind, I’ve lost it [laughter]. So you know, so how much of your food do you say you typically… Oh sorry, that’s the question, do you take a shopping list with you when you go?
Participant: We do, we do. We don’t often stick to it, but we try.
Interviewer: Is it like a basic list or do you…?
Participant: Generally it’s like a basic list, this is what we need, and then if you see other things in the shop, we pick them up as well.
Interviewer: Oh that makes sense, cool, and so all this, all the food that you get, do you typically use it all in the week or does any of it get wasted?
Participant: We used to have quite a bit of wastage, you know, I didn’t like that, you know, you’re wasting food, you’re wasting money, so we cut back a few weeks ago when we found that, it’s improved significantly the amount of waste we have, so that’s really good, I was really pleased about that.
Interviewer: How did you manage to cut down on the waste?
Participant: We just buy less and before we were buying more, and it wasn’t getting eaten and it was being wasted, so we thought we’d cut back on bread, fruit and vegetables, so we use what we’ve got and if we need more, we’ll go locally to buy it, but we’ve found that we haven’t needed to go locally, so the fruit’s not spoiling so we’re not having to throw it out anymore.
Interviewer: Oh brill. What spurred this on if I can ask?
Participant: Because we did have a lot of food waste, we found that we were just, it was just too much for what we first… We thought we’re spending, spending this money every week on the fruit and veg, and we’re not eating it, you know, we’d rather not buy it and not waste it, that makes sense, you know, plus then it’s a, you know, I know it’s not a lot for fruit and veg but every penny helps when you’re [laughter], when you’re saving.
Interviewer: Absolutely, yes it definitely does sort of cut down that money that you would’ve spent then?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: Okay, well thank you very much, it sounds like a pretty common routine that you have every week…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …popping to the Tesco by the bus, you know, doing a big shop?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Also we’re going to talk about a little bit now about bag use and shopping.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So off the top of your head, can you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Oh gosh [laughter] I don’t like them!
Interviewer: You don’t?
Participant: No, they’re, they’re rubbish. They, they’re very poorly made, they’re bad for the environment, I think it’s a waste of money to buy the single use bags when you can buy the, you know, the bags for life. We’ve had bags that have literally lasted us four/five years, they’re brilliant, so yeah, so I think they’re a bit not very good [laughter] the single use bags. But they, as well as that, they’re still bad for the environment, you know, people buy them, they chuck them on the streets, you know, I mean [?? 8.58] one day I counted about 12 bags just floating in, when it’s been raining and it’s terrible. Yeah, I really don’t like them.
Interviewer: So you notice them around the neighbourhood?
Participant: Unfortunately yes. I mean you can imagine, you know, dogs and cats tend to, you know, play with them a bit and rip them up which makes it even worse because then you’ve got little bits of plastic floating around, when it blows you can quite often see a plastic bag blowing around in the wind, but yeah, it’s terrible.
Interviewer: Are there any particular areas that you see the bags?
Participant: Just, since we’ve moved, we seem to see quite a few, but around here, people put their food waste in with their general waste, so obviously birds, cats, dogs all get into the rubbish and they pull out, and what they pull out of single use bags and foil and all sorts of things, so unfortunately right one our street we see quite a bit of it. Yeah, so it’s quite a shame really because if they just took a few minutes to separate their rubbish, it wouldn’t happen. But yeah, such a shame that.
Interviewer: Yes, you see them round the neighbourhood and they cause a mess…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …and you said you, you felt that they were rubbish?
Participant: Yeah, they’re awful because the thing is, with those bags, you buy them, they’ll break and then you just chuck them away, so I mean I don’t see why they’re still selling them, I think they should’ve removed them all completely by now, but they are, they’re just, they’re a bit of an eyesore as well because you know, people put them in bins, you know, outside, and they blow straight out of there. Yeah, it’s just, they’re awful.
Interviewer: It sounds like you see a lot of them?
Participant: [Laughter] we see quite a few round here unfortunately. Hopefully that will stop soon because a lot of people just go oh, I’ll buy these bags for convenience rather than walking to the other end of the checkout and getting the sturdier bags which they can then use again.
Interviewer: But you think people might change that?
Participant: I think it might change, I hope it’ll change. I think supermarkets are becoming more aware of that people don’t want the single use bags because I have noticed that just today they’ve moved in Tesco’s where their bags for life are, and they actually removed the single use bags today I’d noticed, so that’s good.
Interviewer: Is that something that you’ve noticed from taking part in the diary or something you noticed yourself do you think?
Participant: Well taking part in the diary maybe will, made me more aware of it, because last week they had the single use bags up at eye level, but today when I went over, I noticed that they’d been moved, removed completely. I don’t know whether I would’ve noticed that if I hadn’t been thinking about it because of the diary. But I thought that that was a positive change.
Interviewer: Yeah. Okay, so thinking about plastic bags as well and seeing them in the supermarket, do you remember the first time that you saw them in supermarkets?
Participant: Which ones? The…
Interviewer: The single use plastic bags.
Participant: Oh god, they’ve been there for years, as far back as I can remember. Once upon a time that was all there was to buy wasn’t it [laughter]? But yeah, no, but I tell you what, back then they were stronger than they are these days.
Interviewer: Oh yeah?
Participant: Yeah, they, they seemed to be thicker plastic than they use these days, but yeah, I remember seeing single use bags all my life. Yeah, I’m 28 now [laughter] it’s quite a while, but I, I think it’s really good that they’ve introduced bags for life, not so much the plastic bag for life because they’re not so good, but the ones that are a bit like hessian.
Interviewer: Oh I know the ones, yeah.
Participant: I think they’re really, really good those because they don’t break and like I said, they last for years. We’ve had ours for about four/five years and they’re fantastic.
Interviewer: Oh wow, are those the ones that you take when you go shopping?
Participant: Yes, yeah they’re… We get ours from Sports Direct, so they’re quite big as well, but they, they don’t seem to break or very, very rarely. I think we’ve had one that’s broken in the last four/five years, so I think they’re fantastic.
Interviewer: So you didn’t want to get the Tesco, like supermarket ones, you got them from Sports Direct?
Participant: Yeah [laughter] they’re, because they’re not plastic they don’t tear if you put too much in there because even the bags for life tear sometimes if you try and overfill it. It’s like the sack material, so it, it’s a lot stronger, they’re bigger and they were better value. When we bought them they were about 79p for the really big ones whereas in Tesco, it was about 20/30p for a little bag but they’re, you can fit an awful lot into those big bags. So I mean now they’re about £1.60 to buy them so…
Interviewer: Good timing?
Participant: Yeah [laughter].
Interviewer: And you said you didn’t like the bags for life?
Participant: Not the plastic ones, no because I’ve found that the plastic bags for life tear, you know, just like supermarket bags I found that sometimes they tear, but the ones that are hessian or the ones that are like the sack material, those bags for life are brilliant because they last such a long time, but the plastic bags for life, I don’t like them. They just, they tear too easily, you know, they’re not as bad as the supermarket ones. If you put something with a sharp corner in it, it will tear.
Interviewer: Ah right yeah, yeah. Have you ever got one of the bags replaced?
Participant: No, I don’t think I have. I do know that Tesco’s will replace them for you, but I don’t think I’ve ever bought any of them to have them replaced because I know from my mother uses those ones, and I know the do break unfortunately.
Interviewer: Do you know if Sports Direct would replace them?
Participant: I’m not sure if Sports Direct would replace them or not. It’s advertised as a bag for life so they should, in theory, replace them, but I’m not entirely sure.
Interviewer: Do you think that would come under the description of a bag for life, that they would replace them?
Participant: It should do, I’ll have to ask them next time I’m in there [laughter].
Interviewer: Yeah, so you use these Sports Direct bags when you go shopping, is that for the big shop?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever take them when you do the top up shop or little bits?
Participant: Generally no, because we usually just get a loaf of bread and a bottle of milk and I usually just carry that because we only live, you know, about two or three minutes from the shop, so, yeah, so we don’t, it’s not too bad.
Interviewer: And where do you keep your bags? Do you keep them in the house?
Participant: Yes, they’ve got their own little peg on the coat rack, so we always know where they are.
Interviewer: Oh nice, and because you said you take a shopping list?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever, do you have like a routine where you take your bags and the shopping list?
Participant: Yeah. What we usually do on the shopping morning is we, we get up, we sort the kids out ready for school, we’ll write the shopping list, and then on the way out the door we’ll grab the bags and put the shopping list in either my handbag or a pocket, but yeah, we do that every week.
Interviewer: Oh because they’re on the coat hangers?
Participant: Yeah [laughter].
Interviewer: Oh that makes sense. Do you think it’s part of the usual routine, has it really settled in?
Participant: Yeah, well we’ve been doing it now for about, I’d say about four/five years we’ve been doing it, so it’s become ingrained, we just don’t even think about it anymore, it’s just habit.
Interviewer: So it sounds very fixed and sound?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How important then do you think plastic bags are to have in supermarkets these days?
Participant: I don’t think it’s important to have the plastic bags, I think what’s more important is to have, you know, reusable bags, ones that people can buy. I mean I personally think that Tesco should go into like the sack material or the hessian material to get their bags for life, well I think all the supermarkets should do it really, because you know, plastic bags are, you know, they’re, they’re awful, they’re, it’s petrol isn’t it they’re made out of?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: You know, they really are bad for the environment and I would’ve thought by now they would have evolved from that and changed their materials, but it seems to be that that’s cheaper to do, so they go with that unfortunately.
Interviewer: Right, you think it’s all about the money behind it?
Participant: I do. When it comes to the big supermarkets, I think that’s exactly what it is unfortunately.
Interviewer: And you think they should try and keep up with the times?
Participant: Yeah, I do, I think they should, they should sacrifice a little bit of their money because to them it is a small amount, and do something that’s a big more environmentally friendly because our local Tesco’s, they do do a lot of charity work within the local community, so you’d think with them having those sorts of ethics, that they would do the more environmentally friendly thing with bags, but no luck yet [laughter].
Interviewer: So I gather than you never really take the plastic bags from the tills then?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: The single use ones?
Participant: No, we did a long time ago, and oh I hated it because before you got home, your bags were split, you know, you lost your shopping down the road and had to chase your tins [laughter] they are, they’re just a nuisance and I was very glad to, to discover the bag for life from Sports Direct [laughter].
Interviewer: Is that something that you just naturally came across when you found it in Sports Direct was it?
Participant: Well my partner bought one, he bought clothes in there, and he said oh, this’ll be good to take shopping and then after trying it out for a week, I was like oh this is good, so we went and got some more and haven’t looked back.
Interviewer: Can I ask then what do you use for bin liners around the house?
Participant: We use, for the green, general recycling, sorry, for the recycling waste, we use a green bag and for the general waste, we actually use one of the, the council bags, so that it goes straight into the bag and then when it’s full, we just take the lid off the bin, tie it up, and then stick it outside, well out the garden and then, yeah, we’ve found because otherwise, you’re filling up a bag here, putting it in a bag, filling up another bag, putting it in a bag and then it, it, it’s sort of a bit wasteful I thought. So you’re using up a lot of plastic bags when you could just put it directly into the bag itself.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it just cuts down on all that waste?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And whereabouts do you get the green bags from?
Participant: Our council deliver them every three, I think it’s, I think they’re supposed to do it every three months but you can also pick them up from the local library, so that’s where we usually get ours from, because they quite often forget to deliver them [laughter].
Interviewer: Okay, so moving on now to talk about the plastic bag charge, so can you tell me what the plastic bag charge is in your own words?
Participant: That’s, I think it’s 5p now for the single waste bags, single use bags, sorry. Yeah, I’m pretty sure it’s 5p. I, I think they brought it in to discourage people from buying them and to encourage them to buy the bags for life, because you know, it’s a one-off charge and you get to reuse them, but I don’t really think it’s had much of an impact based on the amount of people I see buying the single use bags on a weekly basis unfortunately.
Interviewer: Is that in Tesco’s?
Participant: Yeah and, and in the local Coop as well, they quite often buy the single use bags in there I’ve noticed. But I mean it is a shame, but…
Interviewer: To see them buying them?
Participant: Yeah, I see them buying them quite often unfortunately. I mean most, some people will buy like a loaf of bread and they’ll buy a single use bag to put the loaf of bread in and I just think, you know, you could’ve just carried that loaf of bread [laughter]. It’s a bit of a waste.
Interviewer: A waste of plastic?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah definitely. So when did you hear about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: I can’t, I cannot remember when they brought it in but it was in the news. I can’t remember whether I heard it on the television or whether I read it in the paper. God, that’s quite a few years ago now, but I do know that I read about it recently, that they’re bringing it in in England as well, but it was about five/six years ago they brought in the, the charge?
Interviewer: Something like that I think.
Participant: Yeah, I think it was about that, but yeah, I heard about it in the media, either the television or the newspaper [laughter].
Interviewer: So you’ve heard about it coming into England as well?
Participant: Yeah just, just last week I read about it, that they want to bring it in to England. I’m not sure when they’re bringing it in because I do know at the moment they’re still free in England. I only read the headline, I didn’t read the whole article, but yeah, they’re supposed to be bringing it in to England soon as well, so hopefully we’ll be seeing less single use bags over there as well which will be good.
Interviewer: So you think it’s a good idea?
Participant: I do. If it discourages people from using them, I think it’s good, but I also think, like I said before, they need to bring in more of the hessian bags and the sack type material bags as bags for life. But I do, I think it’s good. Anything that stops… It’s very, very wasteful and harmful, you know, people buy these bags, they use them once, they chuck them in the bin, you know, can you imagine doing that with anything else, you know, you take one bite of your sandwich, you chuck it in the bin, you know, you just wouldn’t do it, and I do like to reuse things as much as possible.
Interviewer: You said they were harmful?
Participant: Yeah, they’re, they’re quite harmful because they’ll, they’ll block gutters, I’ve seen dogs chewing on them and I imagine that’s incredibly harmful, I don’t, I assumed it had some food in it and that’s why the dog was chewing at it, but I imagine that’d be quite harmful for that poor dog, but yeah, they block gutters which causes, you know, little mini floods, you know, they’re quite bad, you know, with birds I imagine, they could be quite dangerous where the birds are flying and the bags are floating all around. But yeah I do, I find they’re awful, awful things.
Interviewer: But you’re not so sure, you said earlier that you see a lot of people around your neighbourhood seem to be using single use plastic bags?
Participant: They are, yeah, I don’t like it [laughter], I wish I could go and talk to these people and explain to them not to do it, but as I say, they’d probably tell me yeah, to get lost [laughter].
Interviewer: What would you tell them? What would you say?
Participant: You know, I’d just explain to them about, you know, it’s harmful, you know, it’s not good, it’s wasteful, you know, if you just bought one of these bags for life, like the ones I’ve got, and I’d even take one of mine with me to show them, you know, it’s a one-off payment but it lasts you for such a long time, you know, say you typically buy 10 bags every single week, that’s 50p every single week, that’s a lot of money you’re wasting on bags that you only use once, you know, and I think it’s awful.
Interviewer: So you said that you, you know, you use these Sports Direct bags…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …for quite some time, did you use them before the charge or was it the charge that made you use them?
Participant: No, we, I think we were using them, no after the charge, yeah. But what prompted us was we were so fed up of the, the bags breaking all the time, in fact, we did buy some of the plastic bags for life and they, they did break as well, but we were just so fed up of all of them breaking and when we discovered these bags, it was brilliant. You can put lots of tins in there, lots of drinks, you know, you can put all your veg in there, they don’t break, they are, they’re brilliant and it was that main reason for us, it’s something that can, that can be reused, it’s not something that you’ll use once and throw away. It’s just a reuse value is why we decided to start taking them and why we’ve stuck with them.
Interviewer: Oh so it’s really working out for you then, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, oh I think they’re great [laughter].
Interviewer: So would you say the plastic bag charge, when it came in, it, it didn’t really have a big effect?
Participant: It was a bit of an annoyance, you know, when, back then we used to do our shopping fortnightly, so we had quite a few bags and it was more of an annoyance than anything else. But it didn’t impact our bags, it was just the fact that we could reuse the Sports Direct bags is why we changed over.
Interviewer: What made you go from fortnightly to weekly shops?
Participant: Because we found that the fresh food generally lasted about a week and then you were eating a lot of frozen stuff and we preferred to have fresh things in every week.
Interviewer: Oh that makes sense, that makes sense.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think with the 5p charge, do you think because you said a lot of people, you know, in your neighbourhood seem to be using single use plastic bags, do you think it should be changed at all? Do you think there should be some sort of change in policy?
Participant: I, I think they should get rid of them altogether.
Interviewer: Oh yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I think that would be the best thing because if they’re not available for people to buy, they’ll stop using them and they’ll have to get something else, something that’s more environmentally friendly, something they can reuse, you know, something that is not just chucked in the bin and you know, I’ve been saying it for years now that they should get rid of the plastic bags. They, they really are a nuisance.
Interviewer: Do you think since the charge, people have become more environmentally friendly or more environmentally aware?
Participant: I think some people have, but I mean you’ll always get some that just don’t care, you know, sorry, they’ll just carry on doing what they want, you know, regardless. I’ve actually noticed that recently they changed our bag collections and our general waste to stripy bags instead of black bags, and they will not take your waste if it’s in a black bag, it has to be in a stripy bag and they’ll only take three maximum. About three weeks ago I noticed that just down the road from me they put out seven black bags and I thought oh god, they’re never going to take them, well they’re still there now and there’s about 11 there now, so you know, some people just don’t care and they’ll carry on.
Interviewer: Eleven bags are just lined up there?
Participant: Yeah, you know, they’re starting to get holes in them with bits pulled out, yeah, so that’s it, some people just, they don’t care what changes you bring in, they’ll just carry on doing what they want, but other people deal with that and they do change and you know, hopefully you’ll eventually get through to the other people.
Interviewer: Do you think it changed your views?
Participant: It’s definitely made me more aware of the amount of plastic bags that were being thrown away, I mean in my own house, when we did shopping with the plastic bags, I found that we were throwing away at least 75% of them because they had holes in them, they just couldn’t be reused again, and you know, I thought that was really wasteful and it would irritate me that, you know, we’ve just bought this bag and now we have to throw it away because the holes are too big to use for anything else. I mean some of them the holes were little enough that you could use them to put rubbish in before putting it outside, but you know, at least 75% of them would go straight in the bin and [?? 31.11] quite frustrating you know, you expect the bags to at least last until you get home [laughter].
Interviewer: So with the 5p charge on the plastic bags, how do you think that compares to other charges, like the congestion charge?
Participant: I don’t really know much about the congestion charge because I don’t drive, but I think it is a little bit unfair that just because you travel within that circle, now I know it’s highly congested and that’s why they do it, but it’s a little bit unfair that you’ve got this extra charge on top of, or that you already pay for, you know, your car, your MOT, your insurance, there’s road tax and then to have the congestion charge, it is a bit steep. But I think if it encourages people to stop, you know, to like maybe car share or find an alternate route into work, I think that’s good, you know, just like with the bag charge, I think, you know, if that helps people to stop doing it, it’s good. But…
Interviewer: There’s also…
Participant: …I do know some roads are, they are awful. I watched a documentary once and they said the amount of traffic that went through the middle of London, it literally raised the temperature in that area quite significantly and the fact that can’t be good, you know, I know there’s parts of Cardiff that heat up significantly during rush hour as well, and that surely can’t be good for the environment.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s, do you think it’s a good approach then to give that a little bit of extra cost to discourage people from doing things?
Participant: Well I’ve thought about it not so much with the congestion, but with recycling, when they’re talking about oh, they might bring in rewarding some people for doing it, and I’m not sure the rewarding system would be so good because you’d end up spending out an awful lot more and then having to come up with it. But I think the penalty, I think that’s a good one because, you know, no one wants to have to shell out more money than they have to [laughter], you know, it’s like the bills go up everywhere, you don’t want any, you know, unexpected things you have to pay for. I think it’s good, just recently in June or July, I can’t remember which, when they brought in the new bags, they started fining people for not putting out their rubbish correctly and based on the figures that they’ve released, it seems to have significantly improved between sort of the first week and the fourth or fifth week, and they say that it’s due to the fines, so I think that’s quite good.
Interviewer: So it can have some positive effects then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So slightly changing tact, we’re going to be talking a little bit about environmental behaviours that you do around the house.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So do you save water at home?
Participant: We try to, like when, when my children are brushing their teeth, I try and keep the tap off [laughter] while they’re brushing. But other than that, we don’t really do a lot because we don’t really drink tea or coffee and we’ve got a kettle but it’s very rare that we get guests. I try and keep, you know, bath water at a lower level rather than a higher one because, you know, you don’t need that much water, you know…
Interviewer: With the kettle, what was the water saving behaviour with the kettle?
Participant: Well when I get visitors, I do try and just put in what’s needed, but yeah, we don’t often have visitors and we don’t use it ourselves [laughter], but we, when we, we’ve got a fish tank and when we empty the fish tank, I try and use that, some of that water to water our plants that we’ve got, rather than just pouring it down the drain. Hopefully the nutrients in the water will be good for the plants [laughter].
Interviewer: Yeah, so it sounds like there’s a couple of behaviours. So what is it that makes you do these?
Participant: It’s just a case of, I don’t, it’s I don’t like to waste it, you know, if you just pour it straight down the drain, you know, I know there’s not a lot you can do with the fish tank water, but you know, even just using a little bit of it, it’s better than pouring it down the drain and then pour, running the tap and getting more for the plants. With the teeth brushing, I don’t do that for environmental reasons, I do that because otherwise my children will play in the water rather than brushing their teeth [laughter], so yeah, I’ve found that’s quite handy. The same thing with the bath water, if there’s less bath water, they play less and it’s easier to get them out.
Interviewer: Less mess?
Participant: Yeah definitely less mess [laughter].
Interviewer: And how about saving energy, like electricity or gas?
Participant: Oh yeah, I’m a big fan of that, I like to turn things off at the plugs or unplug them if they’re not being used. Same with lights. Up until about eight/nine weeks ago, we had nightlights for our children, but which would be on all night, and it got to the point where, you know, this is silly, they’re asleep, they don’t know whether it’s there or not, so we have removed them, so that’s quite good. I like to think that it’s saving us quite a bit of money but in reality, it’s probably not [laughter] but yeah, we’re always turning stuff off that we’re not using. Yes, we’ve stopped the children turning the lights on now as well, so that’s even better [laughter].
Interviewer: So have you noticed any changes in your bills or…?
Participant: Not really because we pay by direct debit, so we pay a set amount every single month, and so it’s always lower in the summer, but whatever accrues from the summer usually pays for the winter. So I mean that, we’ve found that’s quite handy, it saves having to come up with a lot of money in the winter if it’s already paid off.
Interviewer: How about when you’re shopping? Do you look at, do you look at the packaging of certain goods?
Participant: To be honest, not really. We, we don’t really notice. I mean I have noticed that on some things they’ve stopped putting as much packaging which is good because some things, you open it up, you’ve got to take the layer of plastic off, then it’s inside a box and then it’s inside even more plastic, and you know, I always thought that was silly and I’ve noticed that a lot of things now they’ve taken the first layer of packaging off, so it’s just the box which is fantastic, and I’ve also noticed that some sachets have changed from being plastic into, it’s like the foily paper stuff, you know, it seems to be paper on one side and little bit foily on the other. So that’s good, I’ve noticed that, they’ve been changing the packaging on things.
Interviewer: Is that a recent thing that you noticed?
Participant: It’s something I’ve noticed over the last few months, yeah, so that’s really good.
Interviewer: Would you, if you were given the choice, would you choose something that had less packaging or would it not make that much difference?
Participant: If it, if it was, you know, the same product, I would go for the one with less packaging because, you know, it’s less waste and I think they over-package a lot of things. A good example of that is children’s toys, they put so much plastic and cardboard into, you know, in and around the children’s toys, I think it’s a huge waste, and often it’s awfully difficult to get, to get the toys out of.
Interviewer: How about eco-friendly cleaning products? Do you ever use those?
Participant: We do try to use them where possible. I’ve found there’s no alternatives for bleach, that’s very good, but wherever possible we do try and get eco-friendly stuff because I don’t like to use things with lots of chemicals in it, you know, I know they say oh, you know, no harm in using it, but I’d rather not if I can help it.
Interviewer: It’s to avoid the harm?
Participant: Yes that’s right. The thing is, you never know what sort of long term effect that has on you, you know, I know they say there’s no harm in it, but they don’t know for a fact.
Interviewer: So the eco ones are safer do you think?
Participant: Yeah, I do, I think they generally are because they contain less chemicals. I mean I could be wrong, but I think anything that’s got less chemicals in it has got to be better.
Interviewer: And do you, have you noticed anything about your behaviours that you’ve been doing when you’ve been filling in the diary?
Participant: Not really because to be honest, I’ve doing all these things for so long, it’s become, you know, ingrained, like with the bags, you know, I don’t even think about it, we just pick them up and go. Same thing with the turning the taps off and the water off. Yeah, so actually I’ve been doing it for so long I [laughter] to me it seems normal.
Interviewer: Okay well thank you very much, that sounds great. So how concerned would you say that you are with environmental issues?
Participant: I’m quite concerned because you know, for us, in our lifetime, it may not have an effect, but for future generations, you know, like your children, your grandchildren, it could have a negative effect, you know, all these harmful things that we do, and you know, it does worry me, you know, the state of the world that, you know, we’re leaving behind so to speak, you know, all these landfills, you know, it’s just, it’s not good.
Interviewer: So thinking about your children and…
Participant: Yeah, you know, I do worry, like they, they say, I don’t know how serious they are about this, but they seem to think that in the next two decades, they’ll have homes underneath the ground on Mars, and I’ve spoken to a scientist about it a few weeks ago and he was saying that by the time my six-year-old is my age, they will, they believe that they will literally be living on Mars because of the state of the planet, you know, that it’s not sustainable, you know, you mine away all the coal, the oil, you know, you use all these chemicals and they do believe that, that is a big reason why they’ve been funding it so heavily into living on other planets and, usually on the moons of the planets as well.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s something to avoid then by looking after the environment?
Participant: I do, I think, I mean part of me thinks that there’s been so much damage done that you can’t reverse it all, that we’ve sort of gone past the point where it’s fixable, but you know, I still do these things to try and, in my own, you know, small way, to try and help the environment because you know, there’s no harm in doing it, and you never know, you might be able to reverse some of this damage, but I think that it would take a global scale change in attitude and change in behaviours to do it.
Interviewer: Yeah but you’re happy to do your part as well?
Participant: Yeah, yeah oh yeah definitely. But I just don’t think they’ll do it, big business don’t want to, you know, change the way they are and cut into their profit margins, however slightly, and it is such a shame.
Interviewer: So it sounds like the environment is important to you for your children and future generations?
Participant: Yeah definitely.
Interviewer: And it sounds like you’re also quite concerned at the amount of waste that happens around the house?
Participant: Yeah definitely, I, I, you know, I see some of my neighbours and every fortnight they’ve got three bags out, you know, like maybe one of recycling, you know, no food bins out and I think what’s wrong with these people [laughter], you know, it just, it takes minutes just to put it in the right bin, and you know, you’re helping the environment there.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s, would you say it’s part of who you are to look after the environment?
Participant: I think so. Well my grandparents used to, not the food waste, but the recycling, they used to do that and then my mother done it and when they brought in the food waste, she did that, so it’s sort of been, I’ve been around it all my life, the importance of recycling. So I think it’s just something that was picked up on and then just became part of what I do.
Interviewer: Yeah, is it something that you’d like to teach your kids?
Participant: Oh yeah, yes, they already know. They know the difference between, you know, the general, the recycling and the food waste and they’re pretty good at it [laughter].
Interviewer: So compared to the other issues in the modern world such as social, economic or health problems, how important would you say environmental issues are?
Participant: Well I think they’re just as important as all the other issues because, you know, if you break the planet, so to speak, you know, the rest of the issues don’t matter anymore because it’s not, you just can’t live here, you know, if all of a sudden the, the oxygen levels changed because we’d done something so harmful to the planet, then everything else, you know, doesn’t matter. So I, I think it’s a pretty big one, the environment, same with all the fuels and things like that, if they use them all up to the point where there’s nothing left, then it doesn’t really matter about, you know, your economics or that because you know, you can’t, how do you cook, how do you heat water? You know, you have to go back to the start, sort of like caveman times.
Interviewer: So you’ve got to look after the environment first before other things?
Participant: That’s right.
Interviewer: How about things like economic problems? I mean as I say, especially with the downturn a couple of years ago?
Participant: Yeah, it’s not, it’s not a happy front is it, the economics unfortunately. I’ve noticed that since then, the price of practically everything is going up and up, and you know, your wages don’t rise with it. In fact I’ve noticed that a lot of jobs these days pay just the minimum wage, whereas a few years ago, they were above that, but I think the economics is in an awful state as well [laughter] I do. I think they need to do something quite radical to, to fix it, I’m not quite sure what, but they, they do. I think personally all these big businesses should give everyone else a break and stop putting their prices up and just let it eat into their profits a little bit, let everyone else, you know, have a bit of a breather.
Interviewer: Make it fairer?
Participant: Yeah, I do. I mean I think that the difference in wages for some people is quite astounding, like you get your footballers, they get paid thousands and thousands to run around the pitch for 90 minutes, you know, whereas the people that are, you know, cleaning the streets, stacking the shelves, you know, making sure the world’s still ticking along, you know, and they’re on minimum wage a lot of them and I think it’s unfair for the amount of work, you know, I know footballers and that, they do a lot of training, but it is unfair and I do think that something needs to be done to make it, as you said, fairer for everyone.
Interviewer: Yeah it’s the unfairness that you don’t like?
Participant: I do, oh it drives me mad!
Interviewer: So thinking about your environmental behaviours, do you feel like you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Sometimes I do, and other times, you know, I think like, I need to have a little look into this, and I do, I do like to do research about things online, you know, it’s very fascinating, I watch a lot of documentaries as well.
Interviewer: Is there any particular things that you look up?
Participant: Well, what was it I was looking at…? Oh, you know the, on the cans you get those plastic rings, like the four-packs of alcohol, you get the plastic rings?
Interviewer: Oh yeah.
Participant: And there was a picture online of, I think it was a turtle, and he’d gotten stuck in one of them when he was younger and where he grew, it literally stayed into the shape, so his shell, instead of being an oval, it was alike a number eight, and at that point, I did look into, because I thought those sorts of things had stopped happening, I did some research into, you know, how often this still happens and I found it’s actually quite shockingly high, you know, I thought that the world had become educated about not using these, or you know, snipping them so that no animals can get caught in them. But it’s quite shocking just how many people still don’t bother with that, and they said it was quite lucky for this poor little turtle not to have suffered because of it, you know, with his internal organs and stuff.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good.
Participant: But yeah, luckily he’s okay [laughter] but yeah, I did look into that.
Interviewer: But you’re concerned about how many people don’t know about these things?
Participant: Yeah because it, it’s something that people have been complaining about for, oh, at least, at least a decade and a half, you know, when they were saying about all your birds get stuck in them, you know, cats get stuck in them, and I thought that that was something that had been handled, because it did have a lot of media coverage at one point, you know, it’s on the news, it’s in the papers, there was public outrage about it and yeah, it was just shocking to find that it’s still happening all these years later.
Interviewer: And is it about protecting these animals from this?
Participant: Yeah, it’s about protecting the animals and about, you know, just a bit of commonsense about don’t leave it where, you know, an animal can get caught in it, put it in the correct rubbish bins, you know, don’t just oh, you know, I’ve got my alcohol, chuck the plastic on the floor which, you know, was what was happening. But yeah, it’s about, you know, the animals and again, the waste.
Interviewer: And how about yourself? Do you feel like you get the opportunities that you can to be environmentally friendly?
Participant: I do, I do, I’ve recently started working in the nursery, the local nursery, and I was so pleased to find that they have this, this group it’s called the Really Rubbish Group and it encourages children, they’ve got a little committee, where they think of ways to improve the waste usage at the school, like to cut it down, and I thought that was fantastic, you know, getting the children involved in that. They even met an MP just recently to speak about it which I thought that’s fantastic, you know, starting them young.
Interviewer: Yeah so it’s nice to get them, get them involved with the kids?
Participant: Yeah that’s right because then hopefully they keep those same good habits when they’re older.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, absolutely. So is there any other legislation, do you think, that some come into action for environmental reasons, speaking to the MP?
Participant: I do, I do think they need to, to do something more about people fly-tipping which is something that’s started happening again recently due to the new changes they’ve brought in about the general wage, and there’s certain areas where it’s really high, the fly-tipping, and I do think they need, they need to put cameras to catch people and you know, give them fines or even, you know, imprison them for 30 days maybe, but they do need to do something quite harsh to get the message across to people that, you know, you can’t do this. But yeah, I definitely think they need to bring in something more about fly-tipping.
Interviewer: That’s a big problem where you live is it?
Participant: Not necessarily in the area I live, but in the surrounding areas, it’s, it’s become a problem. They were saying, you know, they’ve handed out over 2,000 fines in the one fortnight, but they still had to spend thousands cleaning up the fly-tipping because it had just skyrocketed again and you know, that’s, that’s so sad because people, you know, they don’t want to put out just three bags, they don’t want to spend the time putting it in the correct bag, so they just dump it somewhere, and yeah, that has become a bit of a problem and I think they need to do something about it.
Interviewer: Are there any other problems in the local area that you’ve become aware of?
Participant: I have noticed that, I’m not sure whether this is relevant for the study, but cars are speeding along by the school. There’s a particular crossing, it, it’s a zebra crossing but the cars just will not stop, and you know, it’s a nightmare. I quite often find myself shouting at these drivers because it, it’s just so unfair, and you think with it being near a school, they would be driving safely, but there’s a lot of congestion by the school as well because so many people drive down to the school and then there’s nowhere for them to park, so they have to double park and I do, I do think they need to bring out some policies to encourage people to walk to school rather than drive, because that’s got to be having such a bad impact, all that, all the exhaust fumes in that one little area right by a school. That’s surely got to be a little bit harmful for the children I’d imagine, so I do think they need to bring in something about that as well, you know, some sort of incentive to take the children to school, even if it’s just an incentive for your children get something at the school rather than you getting something, like maybe a special play day once a month if they walk to school every day. So I think a lot of parents would be nagged by their children to do that, you know, and children are a great source of nagging if you want parents to do something [laughter].
Interviewer: Alright, that’s great, well thank you very much, that’s the end of my questions. Oh actually, there are a few more questions, these are very quick ones, just a few demographics about yourself.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Thank you so much for your help. So this is the first phase and that’s complete and now the second phase will be taking place sometime in about 13th of November, the diary starts again…
Participant: Okay, brilliant.
Interviewer: …and we’ll have another interview chat, maybe with myself, maybe with my colleague in the last week of November.
Participant: That’s brilliant.
Interviewer: So we’ll be in touch round about November and you know, we can talk then about remuneration for the next study and where we go.
Participant: Okay, brilliant.