Interviewer: I just wanted to ask you in general what, you know, what, how you found overall the diary filling experience?
Participant: [Laughs] Yeah.
Interviewer: Whatever respect you can…
Participant: Yeah, no, it was fine actually. The first night that I did it, so last, was it last, yeah, last Friday, that probably took the longest, but I think probably just because I wasn’t used to it or anything, so that took about kind of half an hour, and I think because I’d got a shopping receipt as well, that obviously made it a bit longer, but then… and so I think that was the time that I found it the longest to complete, but it was still very easy to do and I understood what I had to do, and I think, yeah, and then as the week got on I kind of, I think I found it easier, but again, probably just because I was used to it and I knew what was coming up, and also kind of, I knew before I was doing it what questions obviously I was going to have to answer. So I was making sure that I’d taken photos of stuff that I’d done and that kind of thing.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how about last night? Because it seemed that you put quite a lot of information last night as well, how long did it take you, do you remember?
Participant: Yeah, last night I think it took me about 20 minutes, I think.
Participant: Yeah, but part of the reason actually, yeah, part of the reason for that was because for some reason I was having Internet issues, and I started filling out the diary, and about, kind of when I got to the, I think the page where it’s asking about which bags, what kind of bags you used for the shopping, when I got there it suddenly, for some reason my Internet signal completely went, and I then tried to get the signal back, but it wasn’t coming back, and so I then basically had to refresh it, and it started it back from the beginning. So I reckon five minutes of that was because of the Internet issues.
Interviewer: Ok, yeah, but otherwise you think it would have taken you about 15 minutes?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I reckon.
Interviewer: The days where, the days where you didn’t do any shopping, how long was that?
Participant: I reckon that took about ten minutes.
Interviewer: Ok, yeah, and some maybe a bit shorter when you [?? 3.00] yeah?
Participant: If actually, yeah, having said that, I reckon probably on average it was about seven minutes, or six or seven minutes.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, so it kind of balances itself doesn’t it?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: So we’re kind of sure that, yeah. Right, and also maybe a few other things about, you know, the diary experience overall. What did you find maybe particularly easy or difficult, was there anything like this?
Participant: I think the only thing that I found particularly difficult was trying to think back to like everything I’d done, and certain household behaviours, just because I was thinking of things like turning off the lights, I’m always normally very good at that, but then sometimes, if I’m going back into a room, for example, in about kind of five or ten minutes, I’ll generally leave the light on if I know that I’ll be going back then, and so I was try… I found it sometimes a bit hard to remember if generally throughout the day I did turn off all the lights kind of when I left the room or not. So it was little things like that, that I think it was, yeah, sometimes a bit more difficult, and then like the shopping bit was quite easy actually because generally, whenever I go to the supermarket I always have a set idea of what I want and a plan, and so it was kind of, I think yeah, that bit I found relatively easy to fill out, and my reason for the kind of plastic bag, bags, kind of, I knew exactly what I wanted to say and my reasons, so I think that bit was probably easier, yeah.
Interviewer: Did you find anything surprising, I don’t know?
Participant: I don’t think so, I’m just trying to think, not really. Although the only thing that I’d say that I think, I guess that I wouldn’t say it was surprising, but that I wasn’t necessarily expecting was the bit where you kind of say whether you were planning to do the household behaviours. I think when I was thinking about the study when you first mentioned it to me, I kind of, yeah, I thought it would mainly be every, well what I considered to be every day behaviours, which generally it was, but then I know there were two options on that list about contributing to financial organisations, or sorry, not financial, environmental and the other one, and so I think that kind of, I wasn’t expecting those to be on there, but then I, yeah, and I think yeah, just because I guess it’s something that I, yeah, because it’s something that I don’t really do, and I think there are other organisations that I would want to contribute to first before kind of an environmental organisation, even though I kind of agree obviously with those types of organisations, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, right, and just overall about the usability of it, what did you think?
Participant: Yeah, no, it was very simple actually. The only thing, although I think you obviously…
Interviewer: In the beginning, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so I think, but actually, yeah, generally it was very easy to kind of go through, and it was clear, and I did it, I think apart from once I did all of it on my mobile phone and it was kind of easy to read the questions and it was obvious kind of, it was in a good order and kind of an easy to understand order.
Interviewer: Great, ok, was there anything that you forgot to mention before we go ahead? I mean anything in the diary maybe that you forgot to mention? Because now, I’ll give you an overview of what we will be doing, but we will be, I don’t think we necessarily come back to the experiences of the diary unless, you know, unless you wanted to, you know, as we go along maybe.
Participant: Yeah, I’m just trying to think whether… oh, the only thing actually that I wasn’t sure about, which, I mean I’ve got a photo in case, but with the household behaviours, you know you said you can email photos of different household behaviours?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: There was one time when I took a photo just of being at the train station and a train, as opposed, to show that instead of getting the car I was getting the train, but I wasn’t sure whether that was particularly relevant. I can’t actually remember now if I did mention that?
Interviewer: I don’t remember that.
Participant: Ah, ok, because yeah, that was the only thing, instead of driving, well actually generally every day this week I’ve taken the train instead of driving, and I don’t, yeah, so I obviously haven’t mentioned that, but then I wasn’t sure whether that would definitely be relevant. Because I know it’s normally like short journeys that you were asking about I think, as opposed to long journeys, because I’m going from Swansea to Cardiff, which is obviously quite a long journey, but yeah, so I thought, I wasn’t sure if I should definitely mention that.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, I mean yeah, for the next stage, if you take part in the next phase, feel free to mention these kind of things, yeah.
Participant: Oh ok, oh ok brilliant.
Interviewer: That seems relevant of the everyday, you know, activities.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: Great, thank you very much.
Participant: Ok, no worries.
Interviewer: So I will give you now a quick overview of what we will be talking about, probably I should have given this right in the beginning. So I’ll ask you a little bit about your shopping routine, and also you know, a little bit about bag use routine, a little bit about… well we’ll talk a little bit about the environmental bit, about your neighbourhood, and then I will ask you a few questions about the plastic bag charge at the end.
Participant: Ok, ok.
Interviewer: So it’s all kind of structured, so we’ll go along and just see how it, how it goes.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: So maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is if you could describe just your typical shopping trip, what does it look like?
Participant: Well I, I’d say in the past three months I’ve generally driven to the supermarket just because we’ve, my boyfriend and I have had a car, which we have now actually got rid of, and it’s, because the supermarket is about kind of, well, 20 minutes away, it’s a lot easier to drive and bring the stuff back in the car, and so I generally… and I generally normally, because my working hours, I’m on a like flexi routine, and so if I work overtime I think take hours back, and I often take hours back on a Friday, so I usually go on a Friday, and I normally… I always write a list actually, I always try and plan, I often try and plan the meals for about two weeks at a time, and so I’ll write down, I’ll decide what meals I’m kind of interested in cooking and want to try, and then I’ll write down, I’ll find the ingredients and make sure I write down those ingredients on my list. And then when I get to the supermarket I will, I’ll generally start in the vegetable and fruit section and then, just because it’s the first bit you come to, and I then generally go on to the meat section, and I normally try when possible to do the two for £7 or three for £10, this is at Tesco, and so I try and do that. And normally the two, sorry, the three for £10 will last me for, and my boyfriend for two weeks, and then after that I’ll kind of go on to the store cupboard items and those type of things. And I generally, I would say that I’m very good at trying to, well, at sticking to my list, but then every so often if I see something that I think would be useful or that we do need and I’ve just forgotten about, I will generally get it, but I reckon overall there, it would probably be about maximum three extra items that I would buy that wasn’t on my shopping list, if you know what I mean. And then, yeah, so I just basically kind of move along the aisles, kind of going up and down as I get to them, and then I generally, and I mean I generally use a trolley as well to put all the items in, and I kind of, I’d say nine times out of ten I bring plastic bags with me to the shopping centre. On one occasion recently actually I bought a cardboard box, which I had taken from the last shopping trip, as in Tesco gave me, because I’d forgotten plastic bags, and Tesco gave me a cardboard kind of crate, which I put my shopping in that time, and so the next time I came I brought that back and used it again, and then I brought back some of the bags for life that I’ve got at home. So I generally remember, but then, yeah, there have been a couple of times recently where I’ve, I think because I’m so busy and I’m kind of all over the place at the moment, I’ve forgotten, and then yeah, so I reckon that’s kind of the process. And it usually takes me I reckon about an hour, just because I kind of, I actually quite enjoy going food shopping, so I kind of take my time over it, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, ok, thank you.
Participant: That’s ok.
Interviewer: That’s very interesting, and then I also wanted to ask you about, you know, the bag use, so you mentioned that you normally use the plastic bags that you bring with you to go shopping, and what are these? Are these the bags for life or the reused, you know, single use bags, or both?
Participant: They’re, actually sometimes I do bring both, but I reckon I bring probably, I normally bring with me about two or three of the bags for life, and I’ll have a kind of one single use bag just in case I’ve got a bit extra, which I need to put it in there, yeah.
Interviewer: And those bags for life are the thinner type aren’t they?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: I don’t know if the pictures worked, I remember putting pictures at some point into the…
Participant: Oh actually yeah, no, I did see, yeah, I was going to say, the first few times I didn’t see the pictures, but I think then, yeah, towards the end and yesterday I definitely remember the pictures, yeah.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and those thinner bags for life, do you reuse them, you know, do you know how many times approximately you can reuse them, or for how long, once a month, two, I don’t know?
Participant: For me personally you mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, I think I’ve reused, I reckon kind of, if I’m thinking about just, yeah, when I go food shopping, I reckon I’ve reused them probably about four or five times I think, yeah, four or five.
Interviewer: And then do you replace them for free or do you buy new ones usually?
Participant: Generally I’ve bought new ones, although they’ve actually, my office here at Cardiff actually, somebody has left some in the kitchen area, and so I actually, and I, as in for people to use freely for when they go shopping, and so a few weeks ago, instead of buying a new one, I remembered that this lady had put the bags there, so I took one of those and used that one, but other than that I’ve generally bought new ones.
Interviewer: And what is the reason for, you know, for using those particular type of bags, why is it better for you to use?
Participant: I think just because they’re easy, they’re easy to get hold of, as in it’s easy to buy some at the supermarket, and especially if you do forget, it’s just, yeah, I think they are quite easy, and generally I have found them quite sturdy. I mean there’s been one occasion, I think probably in the last three months where one has broken, and I think that’s because I specifically had put so much stuff in that it wasn’t holding the weight properly, but generally I’ve found that they’ve been, they’re big enough for what I need to use them for, or if I use kind of two or three, and generally yeah, they don’t break normally, so I’ve found them good in that sense.
Interviewer: Yeah, and in terms of, I don’t know, what makes them actually more practical for you?
Participant: I think because they’re also actually easy to use for other things, I don’t just use it for food shopping, I often use them as well for other things, so for example, if I’m… I’m trying to think of a good example. If I’m bringing in my lunch actually from home and I’ve put it in a kind of Tupperware box, I’m often very conscious that it might kind of open itself and explode in my bag, so I often use those bags to put my food in to bring to work as well, and so in that sense they’re, I think, well, they’re practical because they can be used not just for food but a variety of other things as well, and yeah. I’m trying to think if there’s anything else, yeah, I’d say that’s kind of the main thing, yeah, no, I think that’s… and I guess also when I have had to rebuy them, even though obviously you are charged, it’s kind of only 10p, so it’s easy to buy one if you do need one, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and how does that compare to buying a single use bag?
Participant: Well I guess, because obviously it’s 5p more and generally I, if I, depending on how much stuff I need to carry, I would generally be more inclined actually to spend 10p than 5p, just purely because often with single use bags there have been occasions where I have, I’ve been intending to reuse a single use bag for 5p, but then for some reason or another I haven’t, or it’s kind of… I mean I’ve got a cupboard at home where I put some of these bags, but then often they are easier to break, they can, if something spills on them it’s kind of like, I’ve managed to clean one of the bigger ones before when food spilt on it whereas a single use one, I’ve kind of thought, almost, what’s the point in cleaning it? I’ll just throw it away, and so because I know that I’m likely to reuse the bigger one, I’m kind of more willing to buy that one.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and in terms of, I don’t know, maybe carrying it with you and so on, not when you’re carrying your lunch, but when you happen you to just take those empty bags with you when…?
Participant: Actually I’ve got, at the moment I’ve got a, one in my bag actually, and I think mainly the reason for that is because I know that I do sometimes make trips to Lidl in my lunch break to get some food, and so I sometimes, and I’ve got a bigger, a big Lidl bag, which I’ve put inside my rucksack to take to work, and I’ve, yeah, I think just because I’m pre-empting that I may need to go to the shop at some point, and yeah. So I do, yeah, I do have one in my bag at the moment, but then there have been a few weeks where I haven’t carried on with me.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and is it something automatic for you, to sort of use these type of bags in particular, or does it require any planning or I don’t know, any communication?
Participant: I think now, I would say actually only really recently, kind of within the last month, it’s become automatic, but before that I think it was less automatic and I did have to kind of remind myself and plan to bring a bag with me, and I do, I do still sometimes forget, and I think it’s just because I’m kind of, I’m thinking about a lot of other things at the moment, and my job at work has been quite intense and quite stressful really. And so I think it’s literally because my attention has been elsewhere, I’ve kind of forgotten things that I, I’ve learned as a habit recently, which is why I think I forgot it on Friday. But generally, yeah, the last month, it’s definitely become more automatic.
Interviewer: And before that?
Participant: Before that, yeah, I think I definitely did have to plan, and I think part of the reason actually is, last July I was living in England, and I’ve now moved to Wales for my job, and in England they don’t charge you for plastic bag, and I think I did definitely take it for granted a bit. And even though I did still reuse bags when I went shopping in England, it was definitely not as much as I do now, and I think… so over the last year I’ve kind of trained myself to be more aware of using plastic bags and making sure, oh sorry, more aware of reusing plastic bags, and just to make myself aware of, you know, the fact that kind of, if you do forget then you’re going to have to buy another one and kind of, yeah. So I’ve been trying to train myself up to remember.
Interviewer: Thank you very much, so maybe just a couple more things again about the bags. Does it happen to you to reuse bags for life in any other way than, you know, bringing your lunch or putting your shopping in it?
Participant: I sometimes, this might sound a bit strange actually, but I sometimes use them when, because a lot of my work involves going on work trips around the UK, and I sometimes have to stay in a hotel, I’ll bring a kind of overnight bag, but often I’ll put kind of my clothes inside a bag for life within my bag, just because, just in case… I mean recently actually I went on one and it was, I’d just bought a rucksack with some clothes in, and it was raining very heavily, and when I got the bag back into the hotel, some of the top layers of my clothes were wet because it had rained through my rucksack, and so, but even before that I was kind of trying to put stuff in a plastic bag. And I think because I was, I’m, I do try and generally think ahead about these kinds of things, like if something spills in my bag, at least my clothes won’t get ruined. Or if it rains like it did the day that I forgot to put them in a plastic bag, at least they won’t get wet, and generally if the bag is slightly, for whatever reason, dirty or there’s dust or there’s kind of bit so things, like kind of other stuff in the bag at the bottom, at least if I’ve put it in one of the bag for life bags then my clothes will still be clean. So that I reckon, yeah, I do reuse it for that quite a bit.
Interviewer: Right, and does it happen to you, you know, to reuse plastic bags in general for maybe waste, or not really?
Participant: No, not really, I don’t, I’m trying to think actually. No, I don’t think I’ve ever really used them for waste, no.
Interviewer: Ok, yeah, that’s fine, and do you know approximately how many of those you currently have at home, or maybe at home plus your office, but those that you yourself, you know, husband’s left, but who belong, that belong sorry to your house or yourself in particular?
Participant: Well at work I’ve only got, I’ve got one currently, and at home, is this including single use bags as well, or is it just the big…?
Interviewer: Yeah, you can say both, yeah.
Participant: Ok, so at home I reckon, well for single use I think currently I’ve got about three, and then for the bigger ones I’ve got, let me just think about this, I think…
Interviewer: Just approximately, yeah.
Participant: I reckon about six, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, and you are expecting, sorry, to reuse them?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, ok, I think we’re finished with the bags for the minute [both laugh], and then just a few questions about you know, the environment. Do you think of someone who is concerned with environmental issues, or not necessarily?
Participant: I would say that I would, kind of if I had to put myself in a scale, I would say that I’m probably somewhere in the middle, because I’m definitely aware of environmental issues, but then I’d say I’m probably more aware of some than others, and I make more of an effort to kind of reduce my impact on just some of those things and not all of those things. So yeah, for that reason I’d say I’m kind of in the middle.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you think as someone who is trying to minimise how much waste you create, or not necessarily?
Participant: Yeah, no, definitely at the moment actually. I think since being in Swansea for the past year, because kind of, they really emphasise recycling there, and especially in my street and kind of my area, there is a lot of kind of emphasis on recycling, and so therefore I’m… and they only collect the black kind of main waste, general waste bin liners once every two weeks, and so that’s made me, generally in the last year I’ve been trying to really… like I check all the backs of products to see whether it’s recyclable or whether I can, or I have to put it in the main waste. And whenever I know that you can recycle it, I’ll always make sure that I put it kind of in the designated area next to the bin where I can then put them into the green and pink recycling bags. And with food now, like when I was in London a year ago, kind of a year and before that, a year ago and before, I, because I was living at home, and my mum doesn’t kind of do anything with food waste, she doesn’t kind of recycle food waste or, well, put it in the food recycling thing, and so I was never before that really kind of that aware of it, or I never really made an effort to do that. But now I’m very kind of strict on it, and I always do that every day if I produce any food waste.
Interviewer: Right, thank you, and compared to you know, other issues that exist obviously in the modern times, how important the environment is in relation to those? I think you have talked a little bit upon it a little bit earlier in the discussion today, so maybe you can expand a little bit on this?
Participant: Yeah, so do you mean as in from now and before, you mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, just in the list of priorities, and maybe you know, and kind of other areas that exist in the modern society, in the modern world whatever, also other issues than environmental. So in relation to, you know, those priorities and those issues, what sort of place for you is the environment? How important it is compared to other things?
Participant: Yeah, I would say it’s definitely important, and I’m very aware that obviously it’s kind of, it’s a lot better for the planet and kind of the world and the people in it if you try and minimise the impact and you kind of try and for example, save water, as I know there are, you know, millions and millions of people that don’t have access to clean water, and so that, for example that kind of thing I’m very conscious of, and that’s something that my mum has always made, like told me, “Make sure you turn off taps, make sure you kind of…” especially when washing up, she’s very kind of, “You must only use the tap when you’re rinsing something and then turn it straight off.” And so that kind of thing I think I do find very important, but then to me I guess…
Interviewer: But if we saw it more, sorry, sorry to interrupt.
Participant: Yeah, no, go on.
Interviewer: If we saw it more in terms of value and you know, how important the environmental values would be for you, as compared to other things such as, I don’t know, you know, there are lots of things in the society, such as, could be health, could be social things like, I don’t know, socioeconomic, like unemployment or some kind of, you know, reasons of whatever it is, lack of [?? 29.59], or any kind of other problems that exist?
Participant: Yeah, well actually yeah, like thinking of it like that, I kind of would say it’s not really high up on my list, because I think other things I actually, for example, things like unemployment and homelessness and that kind of thing, to me is really, it’s something that I kind of, I would care more about I think.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: I think it’s because I kind of, like I realise that I’m very lucky and I’m very grateful for things I have, and I kind of, I know I can go home to a nice house, and I’ve got a good job, which I’m happy with, and I think I’m, I realise that I’m lucky, and not everybody can have that, and a lot of people in the world are really struggling. And I think also, because I, where I’m living, I do see quite a lot of homeless people, and that’s something that has always, since I was born practically, I’ve always felt really bad whenever I’ve seen a homeless person, really kind of, I’ve wanted to help them. And I think because it’s been very obvious and it’s in front of my face, I think I’ve kind of developed more of a caring for it, and whereas things like the environment, even though I’m aware of the impact and I’m aware of what’s happening to the environment, because it’s something that maybe is not immediately in front of my eyes and really obvious, and because it’s not affecting… it’s something that’s on a lot larger scale and it’s affecting kind of populations, whereas I think I almost identify more with helping individuals and yeah, and that kind of thing, if that makes sense, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, sure, and would you say that the environment is an important part of you, or not really?
Participant: Oh gosh, that’s difficult. I think if you had asked me the question a year ago, I probably would say, “Not really at all,” but now I think because I’m becoming more aware of it, I would say it is definitely, it is kind of, yeah, I’d say it is kind of a part of me, but I wouldn’t say a, kind of very much so.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, ok, thank you. Right, so we’ll talk just a little bit probably more about the behaviours, I think we’ve covered most of them. So I’ll just ask you, you know, which of the sort of pro-environmental behaviours you find particularly easy to do, or not so easy to do?
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: You know, maybe of those that were on the list that you’ve had to tick every day?
Participant: Oh ok, yeah, yeah, well definitely the kind of, turning off the tap and switching lights off generally I think because it’s now kind of out of habit, I find those things quite easy, and again, both my parents have always been quite, have always said, “Right, turn the light off as you go out, or…” and even things like when the TV is on and if I’m not in the room watching it, my parents always said, “Turn the TV off and, if you’re not watching it,” and that kind of thing. So I’m quite, those kinds of things are easy, and I’d say again, walk, apart from recently when we’ve had this car, which we knew we were going to be sending to the scrapyard yesterday, and we wanted to kind of make the most of having it and go and visit different places in Wales, apart from then, generally I would be quite kind of for making sure I walk distances instead of unnecessarily using the car, and I think that’s mainly because I generally quite like walking to places and I quite like the exercise. So I think I find that relatively easy, and then I think the things that I kind of find harder are things like, I remember the washing clothes at 30 degrees, that kind of thing I think I… a lot, actually recently, a lot of the times that I’ve been putting washing on, it hasn’t really washed properly, even, this is at 40 degrees, which I reckon, that’s the temperature, which I normally wash clothes at. And it hasn’t been, it doesn’t seem to have been washing them properly, and I don’t know if it’s a problem with our washing machine, or because maybe there’s not enough washing liquid in there, or maybe it’s kind of just not hot enough, and so I haven’t wanted to go below 40, just because I think if it was lower than 40 then it wouldn’t be washing it properly at all, and so I haven’t even tried. Although actually now, having said this, maybe I should actually try first and then I can at least work out whether there’s a problem with the temperature or not. So that kind of thing, yeah, I think I’d find harder to do, and then the contribution to like financial, sorry, environmental organisations and petitions and stuff, again, I know I’ve mentioned this obviously, but because there are things that I reckon are higher up on my list of values and priorities, like things like homelessness and also I’d rather kind of, yeah, things like children who are neglected or abused, those kind of things. So, vulnerable people that don’t have privileges that I have in kind of this kind of world scenario, I kind of, I think I’d rather give my money to that kind of thing, or sign petitions about that kind of thing, and so I’d find that probably harder to kind of get myself to go online and find a petition or an organisation to contribute to. And then I think, again, boiling the kettle with only as much water as I need, that’s something that I kind of, again, I’ve started probably in the last six months, and it’s because I went home about six months ago and I boiled the kettle full of water and my mum said something. She was like, “Why have, you don’t need that much water if you’re only going to be using it for this?” And then it occurred to me, actually yeah, that is a good point, and so now I’ve been kind of automatically doing that. So I’ve found that quite easy, and yeah, I can’t think of any of the other ones, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, that’s ok, yeah, if anything comes to your mind then you can mention, we’ll try and move along a little bit.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: And do you think you have enough knowledge and skills to be, you know, environmentally friendly, or not, what would you say?
Participant: I think I have adequate skills and knowledge but it could definitely be improved upon, and I think maybe even if I just read up more about it and read up on specifically the impact of certain things and how not doing certain things can save the environment. I think if I just, yeah, if I took the time to read up on it more it would increase that knowledge and skillset.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, sure, ok, and do you think that the third parties, for example government, environmental organisations, provide you with enough support to help people to be more environmentally friendly, or not?
Participant: I think in kind of recent years they’ve started to more so, and I’d say things like the kind of recycling and waste, that kind of thing I think they’ve provided quite a lot of kind of information and help, but then on other things, kind of, I wouldn’t say… well things like kind of, you know, saving electricity, and even water actually, I wouldn’t say that there’s been anything that I’ve noticed that’s really obvious that they’ve done to kind of help and support. I mean maybe it’s because I haven’t been going online and seeing what they’re doing, but there’s nothing that I can really think of.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and are you overall satisfied with your current environmental behaviours or not, is there anything you know, that you would like to change? Or do you intend to change anything in the future, or are you just happy with the way you do things at the moment?
Participant: Yeah, no, I think, I reckon I generally am happy with the way I do things at, the way I do things at the moment, and I think if anything, I would like to just keep increasing my knowledge of it really, because I do realise it is, it is an important issue, even if it’s not something that’s kind of really in front of you, like somebody who’s homeless for example, it is still an important issue, and I know things like fossil fuels are running out, and it can, it is going… and obviously things like global warming, those kind of issues, they are, they are having an impact. And so whatever I can do, kind of, even if it’s not going to change anything on the grand scale, anything that I can do, I will try and continue doing.
Interviewer: Great, thank you. Now I would like to ask you a little bit about your neighbourhood, I’m sorry, this is jumping to different topics…
Participant: Yeah, no, that’s fine.
Interviewer: But it’s actually a little bit linked somehow, probably, probably, let’s see.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Could you describe, you know, very briefly, relationships, relations between people in your neighbourhood? Do you sort of think of them as a united community or not necessarily?
Participant: I’d say it’s kind of mixed because there’s, there are, quite a lot, I’m living quite near a student area of Swansea, just because of the University, and so therefore I’d say a lot of the time it kind of feels like it’s not a really tight knit community, just because often students are coming and going, and they’re going back home for the holidays, and in that sense they’re not kind of around, they haven’t been around a very long time for that community feel to build. But then on my street actually, if I was thinking literally about kind of the last section of my street, which is kind of a dead end, and probably about, maybe 12 houses, who generally now, even if I don’t know all the neighbours, I recognise them and I’ll maybe say hello to them. I’d say there’s kind of quite a community feel there, and I know they are all people who kind of get their rubbish out on time and their waste out on time, and I think they’re, it kind of does feel in that sense that people are working together to try and you know, recycle and that kind of thing. And everyone always has their recycling bags out with the plastic or the cardboard, but then I’d say as kind of slightly bigger area, it doesn’t feel that kind of tight knit.
Interviewer: Ok, and what would you say about, you know, in civilities, such as litter, you know, and social behaviour, anything you notice in that? Would you say it’s a problem or not necessarily?
Participant: I would say that it is a little bit of a problem, in fact no, I would say it is definitely a problem because often, again, not really so much on my street, but on the kind of nearby streets I often do see litter, and I think a lot of it is because some of the students do go out late at night and get drunk, and then I often see kind of empty beer bottles on the street, or crisp packets I kind of often see, and also pizza boxes as well, and so I think that is… I mean it’s not every day that I see something like this, but it is still, it’s noticeable, and also there’ve been, again, like often when people leave their rubbish out, the seagulls recently have been attacking the bags. And especially on the street, which leads up to my street, some of the bags have been kind of broken, and instead of people, the people whose house it is and who put the rubbish out, cleaning it up, generally they will just leave it there for the men to collect, with all the rubbish and food on the ground, and I’d say that that is a bit of a problem.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you yourself personally take part in any, you know, neighbourhood life or any neighbourhood projects or community projects at all?
Participant: No, not currently.
Interviewer: Ok, yeah, that’s fine. Right, so we’ll move to sort of last section of the interview, this is going to be now again about the plastic bag charge, so I know we’ve touched upon it quite a lot, and also in the previous study that we did, so I’ll just ask a few questions here.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: Well, maybe just again, if you could just generally tell me what you think about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah, no, I think actually, even though sometimes it is a little bit annoying if I forget a bag and I have to pay, I mean even though it’s only 5p and 10p, it is sometimes annoying because it was something that I forgot and that I would normally always have a bag with me, and so it’s kind of, is more like the principle that I’m having to pay for something that I’m always very good at remembering normally, and then because I’ve forgotten now, I’m having to pay. But generally I think it is actually a good idea because it’s, I think it does discourage people from using a new bag every single time, and it has caused some people to start reusing bags, just because they kind of, why, you know, pay the 5 or 10p when you have got a bag with you? And so I think it’s actually really good in that sense, and it’s making people more aware, even if you don’t necessarily use a bag, knowing that you’re having to pay 5 and 10p will obviously cause people to ask, “Well why am I having to do this?” And then if they’re not necessarily environmentally aware, they, it helps them become more so, environmentally aware, which I think’s a good thing, and so yeah, so I think actually… and it’s obviously that everybody can pretty much afford, because it is so cheap to buy one, so you do still have the option of having one, and it’s not like you’re kind of being punished for forgetting, or for not having a bag with you.
Interviewer: Sure, thank you, and did you notice any, you know, differences? You said you moved not very long time ago from England, so did you notice any change, you know, differences from how things are in supermarkets and in Wales, in relation to this plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think yeah, people are often, like when I’ve been in supermarkets in England, people generally when the person at the till says, “Would you like a bag?” Generally I’d say more often than not, people will have, will take a plastic bag, but then actually I did go back, again, I visited, I visit generally most months, and about two months ago I went back and I actually noticed, because now I always, whenever I come back to England I always forget that the bags are free, and so it kind of, it always surprises me when they just give me… like for example, if I’m going into a shop and they don’t always ask me if I want a bag, and they’ll just put something in the bag for me, and I’ve realised they haven’t charged, and I kind of, yeah, I often forget that. But I went into a supermarket quite recently in England and a lot of people had actually brought bags with them, and I noticed that there was one person who had, who asked for a bag, who had brought some but then also wanted an extra one, and I realised obviously he wasn’t going to be charged, which yeah, again, I always forget that. But I think people are now, because he’d obviously brought some on his own but then wanted an extra one, and I think people now obviously, even if you’re not having to pay for it, are still aware that it’s a good thing to do, to reuse bags, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and did you notice any difference, or are you noticing any differences in the environmental sort of impact between England and Wales?
Participant: To be honest I haven’t…
Interviewer: Related to bags, sorry.
Participant: Yeah, I haven’t, I would say I haven’t actually noticed anything obvious, but then again I think maybe because, for example my mum will often reuse bags, and so generally when I’m at home, when I kind of go back, and so I often see her reusing bags, which is what I’ve been doing in Wales. So in that sense I wouldn’t say I’ve actually really noticed a massive difference.
Interviewer: In terms of like the amount of litter and plastic bags on the streets, in the nature, I don’t know, maybe you haven’t noticed…
Participant: Yeah, no, to be honest I don’t think I’ve noticed, I wouldn’t say I’ve noticed, or there’s been nothing really obvious that I’ve noticed, so I’ve, yeah.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and do you think, what do you think about how this policy is being delivered in Wales at the moment?
Participant: Yeah, no, I think it’s, I think it is good actually because I often see, in fact there’s a sign outside the supermarket reminding people to bring their bags for next time, and, or to reuse the bags for next time, and there is quite, in the Tesco’s that I go to, quite a lot of advertisement about that kind of thing, and buying a bag for life as well. And generally the supermarket staff, when kind of, well, this doesn’t happen every time, but a couple of times they’ve said, they’ve tried to kind of give a reason as to why it might be better for you to buy a bag for life as opposed to a single use bag. Because I know at one point I wasn’t sure whether to get a single use… this was about six months ago. I wasn’t sure whether to get a single use or a life for bag, and I kind of paused when she asked me which one I wanted, and she kind of then said, “Obviously you can reuse it.” So they’ve obviously been kind of, well, they’re made aware of why it’s better to kind of get a bag for life as opposed to a single use one, and so I think yeah, generally where I am it’s quite, it’s delivered quite well.
Interviewer: Sure, ok, and also, you know, there are different other charges, for instance congestion charge that already exists, and also without, you know, just it’s a hypothetical example of a charge, which doesn’t exist, but it actually exists in other countries like Germany. It’s a charge on plastic bottles, basically when people go and buy a bottle of Coke, they will be paying something like maybe 15p in advance, but then they can return, if they return the bottle they get those 15 back, so.
Participant: Oh ok, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: How do you think this plastic bag charge that exists now, you know, for the bags, how does it compare to the other types of charges that I’ve mentioned now?
Participant: I think it’s obviously, well it’s different in the sense obviously that you’re not going to be getting any money back for returning the bag, actually I don’t know if that happens actually, I’m not aware of that happening, if you return your bag you don’t get the money, the 10 or 5p back I don’t think.
Interviewer: No, I don’t think so.
Participant: No [laughs].
Interviewer: You can just change the bags for life.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and so I think, but I actually, I think the bottle thing is actually, in some ways I actually think it’s even better than this, the bag idea, but only in terms of, I think, I often notice there’s more problem with bottle litter, and people just throwing bottles away in general waste as opposed to recycling them, and I think that is more of a problem than people kind of throwing away bags or not reusing bags, and especially because people, in England, even if you’re not charged for the bag, you still, a lot of people I know have still reused the bag anyway because it’s, I think it’s easy to do. And, whereas I think if you had a scheme where you kind of, you were encouraged to, yeah, I think if you were encouraged to give something back once you’d used it, and it was, I mean you were getting, kind of even if small, some sort of financial incentive for it, I think some people might be quite attracted to that idea, and they wouldn’t litter their bottles, and again, it would make them aware that it’s better to either reuse it or to give it back so that it can be recycled.
Interviewer: Yeah, thank you, and do you think with introduction, you know, even when you moved to Wales, do you think that in this kind of context you became a person, you know, maybe more environmental, you said you were more environmentally aware now, but also did you start to do more things for the environment…
Participant: Yeah, I reckon…
Interviewer: … lived in Wales and…?
Participant: Yeah, I think definitely I did start trying to, and I think especially with things like, with the bags actually, I reckon that is something that has really changed, and even though again I did reuse the bags when I was in England sometimes, it wasn’t as much as I am doing now. So I have been doing that, and also generally recycling, I think I’ve, I mean at home I did used to recycle, and my parents recycled, but I think I was less kind of like, for example if I was recycling something, I would often at home back in England, I’d forget that not everything on the item might, like be able to be recycled. So I know often lids, like the top of the bottle, you sometimes can’t recycle, and, whereas at home I might just put the whole kind of bottle or fruit juice box in the recycling, now I’m very aware that you have to maybe take the lid off and wash the carton out and then put it in the recycling. So I think that that kind of thing I’m doing more, I’m doing more so.
Interviewer: Great, ok, and just the last question, what do you think will happen maybe in ten years’ time, sort of longer perspective, as a result of plastic bag charge and reduction in the UK, if anything?
Participant: Yeah, I reckon it, generally the percentage of people kind of wanting to buy bags will definitely have reduced, but I think probably only by a small amount, because I think there is obviously still chance, a chance that people will forget, or people may need to buy a new one, and I think it wouldn’t necessarily hurt everyone to exchange their bag for life, and so therefore they would end up just buying a new one. So I think even though you would get more people reusing bags, you, it wouldn’t kind of completely eliminate people buying them or still needing them. I think you would still kind of get quite a lot of people doing that anyway, but I think overall as well, I think as a kind of area, people will be, become, even if it’s a little bit again, more environmentally aware about kind of plastics use.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, ok, thank you very much Sophie.
Participant: That’s ok, no problem.
Interviewer: Is there anything that you would like to add or to emphasise?
Participant: No, I think, I think I’ve said everything that I wanted to, so yeah.
Interviewer: Any questions that you have now, you know, about what we have done during the diaries up to now?
Participant: No, I think, oh actually the only thing I was going to ask was, I didn’t know whether it was important, but I wrote, although you might have been able to track it in the end, I wrote down rough times in the evening that I filled out the diary, and I’m not sure whether that, you needed that information or not?
Interviewer: Could you explain that again, sorry?
Participant: As in, so I, you know how you said to do the diary between 6 and 11pm roughly?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: I wrote down roughly the kind of times in the evening on each day that I completed the diary, just because I wasn’t sure whether you needed to know the time?
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, it actually comes automatically when I see, it’s quite a good system, this Bristol Online Surveys that we’re using…
Participant: Yeah, ok.
Interviewer: …the University has, basically it indicates exactly the time when a diary has been submitted…
Participant: Oh ok, oh brilliant, oh ok, that’s good then, because I wasn’t sure actually if my, if some of my times might not be completely accurate anyway, so, oh.
Interviewer: No, no, no, that’s fine, that’s absolutely fine, so yeah, it gives quite… I would recommend using this if, you know, if you need for any research purposes.
Participant: Oh ok, brilliant, yeah, ah.
Interviewer: And it’s for the University overall, I’m sure other universities have something similar as well.
Participant: Oh ok, yeah, oh, very good. Yeah, so apart from that, actually, so the November one, is it going to be a similar thing then, it will be, yeah?
Interviewer: Yeah, in November, we can probably already consider it not a pilot but I just wanted to pilot it once basically, we’re pretty sure that it was working, but the only thing, you know, that hasn’t worked yet is the Internet reminders, email reminders and the SMS reminders that we promised, but I’m working on that…
Participant: Oh yeah.
Interviewer: So it will be definitely in place for next phase, and it should be in place now for this phase for…
Participant: Oh ok, oh brilliant.
Interviewer: For the remainder 59 participants [laughs].
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, other than that I think it’s going to be a full, normal diary for you just as for everyone else, so it’s going to be ten days, the remuneration is higher, I don’t remember what I put in the information sheet, but I think it’s £70 I think.
Participant: Oh ok, yeah, that sounds, I think that’s what you put.
Interviewer: Something like that, yeah, and then there is also the prize draw.
Participant: Oh ok.
Interviewer: If you take part in both phases, you know, if you successfully complete it, I mean not successful, but if it’s all completed [laughs].
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: So when everything is there, you are entered in the prize draw to win…
Participant: Oh ok.
Interviewer: ...and it’s quite a good chance I think, 170 chances is not too bad probably.
Participant: Yeah, no, definitely, definitely, yeah, very good.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s going to be very similar, the diary is going to be very, very similar to what you’ve done just now, I don’t expect any, you know, dramatic changes to it.
Participant: Ok.
Interviewer: It is supposed to be exactly the same, and the interview will be, will have probably a slightly different focus, but again, yeah, it’s going to be pretty much along the same lines but we’ll probably be asking about the experience overall and things like that, so yeah.
Participant: Ok, brilliant, perfect.
Interviewer: Yeah, so we have in the schedule 25th of November I believe?
Participant: Yeah, that’s what I’ve written down.
Interviewer: And are you planning to be in Cardiff still at that point?
Participant: I’m hoping, yeah, no, I think I will be actually, yeah, it’s still kind of only about 90% certain, but I’m pretty sure that is where I’ll be, but if I, if I find out in the next few weeks that I’m going to be anywhere else, I’ll let you know asap.
Interviewer: Yeah, so just when, so just we have, you know, your contact, alternative contact if anything, so.
Participant: Yeah, ok, yeah.
Interviewer: That’s probably best. I don’t know if you have provided already an alternative email or not?
Participant: Oh gosh, I’m not sure if I have.
Interviewer: If not, probably it would be better.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, no, I can do that, I mean do you want it now, another email?
Interviewer: It’s up to you really, but you know, so that we don’t lose you in case you want to take part in the second phase?
Participant: Yeah, actually I’ve just realised, I will still, I’m just trying to think. Actually, no, I’ll definitely still have the same email address details, so yeah, in fact yeah, no, I’ll definitely have the same email address, but it’s just, because I know, even if I finish the job here, I think my manager said it will remain active for about a month after I’ve left, and so, and I think I wouldn’t be leaving really before October anyway, so it would still be active in November.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah that’s fine.
Participant: Brilliant.
Interviewer: And I’m trying to sort out now the payments, so it will come shortly, don’t, please don’t, you know, please bear with me in case it doesn’t come within maybe a week or so, I’ll try to do it as quickly as I can…
Participant: Oh ok, oh thank you.
Interviewer: …financial administrator, but everything will be there, so don’t be concerned about it.
Participant: Ok, oh brilliant, oh thank you.
Interviewer: Yeah, I will let you know news about it. I’m also going on conference at this, at the end of this week, so basically I’m leaving on Sunday and coming back mid next week, so I’ll, you know, if there are no news before that, please don’t worry, but I’ll maybe today, or then the latest I will give you some news about it on the 27th, but I will definitely get the payments out, you know, for the first phase after the people, after people have completed it obviously.
Participant: Oh ok, well thank you very much.
Interviewer: Ok, no problem at all. Thank you for taking part.