Interviewer: What did you find easy and what was a little bit difficult to write down, for example?
Participant: For me, just remembering exactly everything I did. With working I was doing 12-hour shifts as well, then coming back and it was always a long day then.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: No, nothing, it was all straight forward, easy enough.
Interviewer: OK, maybe then the next thing we could speak about is your shopping sort of routine, OK, food shopping routine. So if you could probably describe in your words how your typical food shopping trip looks like.
Participant: We do a big shop once a fortnight, so we get everything and then, anything we need, I don’t go to one particular supermarket, I just go and get bits and pieces in different ones, the best offers or what have you in each supermarket on what I need and then it’s just basically bread and milk or something perhaps if we need any of that, you know, throughout the fortnight.
Interviewer: So this big fortnightly shopping, where do you usually do it? What kind of supermarkets?
Participant: Lidl, Aldi, Morrisons, Home Bargains for cleaning bits and pieces.
Interviewer: And did you say that it’s not only one supermarket that you go to for that main shopping trip but different ones?
Participant: It’s various ones, yeah.
Interviewer: Is it like, once a fortnight you will go to this shop and then another time you will go that shop?
Participant: No, no, when I go shopping I’ll go and get what I need from the one shop and then go onto another one and then move onto another one.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, and for the small like top-up shop with milk and bread, which ones would you use, which shops?
Participant: For bread, we have a local bakery which is ideal for me because once, if I’ve done a 12-hour shift, you can still get fresh bread baked that night at seven o’clock in the morning and it’s just ideal for me. You just ring them, I ring them sometimes on the way home from work, just check they haven’t left yet and just go and pick up a loaf of bread from them.
Interviewer: Sure, and how do you plan your food shop? Do you take a list with you?
Participant: No, I don’t, I just go by, basically, what offers are on, what’s on offer, you know, and if something jumps up and says, I fancy that tonight.
Interviewer: OK, and what is important for you when you choose food, apart from the price?
Participant: The quality of it. I can’t stand eating fatty foods and rubbish things so the best I can get for the best price.
Interviewer: And then apart from these fatty things, what else do you look at in terms of quality?
Participant: Just, I don’t know, if it looks alright. I’m pretty adventurous anyway, I’ll try most things so as long as it looks nice and it’s not, the calories as well I suppose. I’ve seen steaks and what have you and look at the calories and just think, “No, I can’t eat that.”
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is less important for you when you buy food?
Participant: Where it comes from doesn’t really, doesn’t bother me, the packaging, if it’s loud and garish and you know, they try to entice you to buy them, I’ll just still look at the parts I want to look at, you know, does it look alright? The dates and this, that and the other.
Interviewer: Sure, and how do you usually travel to buy food?
Participant: In the car.
Interviewer: So you said, that’s for the main trip I suppose, yeah?
Participant: Yeah and for getting the bread because I’ll pick it up on the way home because I’m in the car anyway and I pass the bakery on the way home.
Interviewer: Yeah, and when you do the main shop, is it also a combined trip to do other things or usually it’s just for?
Participant: No, it’s just for that.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how long does it take you to get different bits from different shops?
Participant: Possibly three hours, I suppose. Each time you get to a certain store, look around, get what you want and then realise, “Right, I need this, that and the other” or I move on to the next store. They’re not all in the same place, there’s a couple in the local town, about three miles away and then I go to another supermarket that’s five or six miles away. So the travelling time as well.
Interviewer: Sure and when you buy fresh food once every two weeks, how do you store it so that it still keeps fresh?
Participant: It’s in the fridge and then I keep checking on the dates then and everything that’s getting short date, I try to use the closest dates first and then once it gets on, with working up to 12 hours as well, so I put it in the freezer and then I just pull them out and eat them as and when.
Interviewer: So you freeze some of the things?
Participant: Yeah, I keep them in the fridge up until they’re getting close to the use-by dates and then I’ll then put them in the fridge then.
Interviewer: Yeah, and when you go to…
Participant: Freezer then, sorry, not the fridge, I know what I meant.
Interviewer: Yeah, and when you go to buy food, do you go usually with other family members or do you go on your own?
Participant: I’ve gone with my wife or I’ve gone on my own, it just depends if we’re both available at the same time then we both go, if not then I’ll go or she’ll go, you know?
Interviewer: And if you go together, how do you co-ordinate who buys what?
Participant: We just walk around the store and say, “Do we fancy this or shall we have this?”
Interviewer: So you basically do all the shopping together?
Participant: It’s not one of us will say, “I’m the one who’s picking, you just put it in the trolley or carry it.” We just go round and, you know, “Shall we have this for a change or shall we try this?”
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Does it ever happen to you to have food waste at home in terms of things that haven’t been used that they have to be thrown away?
Participant: Oh, no, I haven’t done that for, oh, God, donkey’s years, a long, long time.
Interviewer: So you try to use everything you’ve got?
Participant: I do use everything, I couldn’t tell you the last time I threw anything out.
Interviewer: Sure, great. Is there anything else that you want to add to the food shopping trip, anything that you haven’t mentioned?
Participant: No, no, you’ve covered pretty much everything. As I said, I just pick up the odd loaf of bread while I’m passing. I prefer the bread from the bakery anyway, it’s so much better than this manufactured plastic stuff.
Interviewer: Sure, and you know you mentioned the different supermarkets that you were buying at, I forgot to ask why have you chosen those particular ones?
Participant: Because what’s a good price in one store isn’t necessarily a good price in another store. As I said, with cleaning products I’ll use this Home Bargains store because you can get identical products to the supermarket for half the price.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and are these shops situated close by to your place or do you need to travel a little bit?
Participant: No, there’s two supermarkets that I use, well, a supermarket and a Home Bargains place in the same town and then I have to travel about five miles for another store and there’s two stores in that town, two alternate stores.
Interviewer: And those in town, are they, kind of, walking distance or not really?
Participant: No, they’re about three miles.
Interviewer: OK, so for a big shopping trip.
Participant: It’s the car, I walk to the car, that’s my range of walking. [Laughs] And I’m not happy if I have to park the car further than up the street.
Interviewer: That’s our tired realities. OK and now I’m going to ask, we’ll move to something else and I’ll ask you a slightly unusual question. When you think of supermarket plastic bag, what does it make you think of? If you could tell me maybe five words that come up to your mind.
Participant: Well, it’s pointless, there’s too much of it, I know that’s more than one word, sorry. It affects the food, as far as I can see, from what I’ve come across.
Interviewer: Affects what, sorry?
Participant: It affects the quality of the food. You get a bag of potatoes in a plastic bag and they’re sweating. I just rush to get them straight out the bag, I prefer things in paper bags and stuff like that. Just fresh unpackaged food if I can, you know, just get a bag and put what I want in, then not in these pre-packed things because it’s just, it’s no good for the food as far as I can see, or for the produce.
Interviewer: True, yeah, and do you remember when you have seen the plastic bags in supermarkets for the first time, approximately?
Participant: No, I couldn’t tell you.
Interviewer: Do you remember any times when there were still no bags, that people were not using plastic?
Participant: Oh, yeah, I sort of remember that and in certain stores now. You can go to Morrisons and lots of things aren’t in bags.
Interviewer: Yeah, and that earlier point where there were no bags, what did people used to do when bags were not available in supermarkets?
Participant: You just had a brown paper bag, as far as I can remember.
Interviewer: And can you remember when the bags kind of came to shops?
Participant: Not really, no, I just go in there and get what I want, always have. I do look for, as I’ve got older and I realise that I take more notice, I suppose, of the state of produce and what have you that I’m buying. When I was younger, I couldn’t have cared less, it was just something to eat when I was younger but as you get older, you think about things a lot more.
Interviewer: Is that in terms of health and things like that, or is it something else as well?
Participant: I appreciate it if it tastes nicer more whereas before, when I was younger, it was just a case of something to eat before I went out or did this or did whatever I did. Now I sit down, we have a nice meal and I enjoyed that, you know, the taste is nice. Also when you’re younger, I don’t think you could care less personally. I suppose times have changed now but when I was younger, I remember the first sort of frozen products we had was beef burgers and when frozen peas come out, we’re talking the 60s and 70s. You know, it was a hell of a shock but again, it was just convenient, quick and something to grab with but now, I like some nice potatoes, you know, nice food.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what kind of bags do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: I like these bags for life, I keep them in the boot of the car.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags for life are these? Are these plastic ones or are these heavy duty ones?
Participant: Heavy duty ones.
Interviewer: Yeah and where did you get those from, what kind of shops? Do you remember?
Participant: I bought one, well, a couple in a supermarket and then a local, like a Home Bargains, they were selling a few hessian-type bags.
Interviewer: And how many do you usually use when you go food shopping?
Participant: I take about six to eight but I keep them all in a store bag thing and put the rest back in there when I’ve finished.
Interviewer: And why is it that you prefer to use those sort of heavy-duty type bags as opposed to, you know, those bags for life that shops exchange, I think they’re about 10p each.
Participant: Oh, I’d end up with no end of them. If I didn’t keep them in the car, I’d have to keep buying them and buying them and buying them again because I’d forget the bags and that’s just silly. The house isn’t that big to have that amount of bags.
Interviewer: Sure but if you bought a few of them and then used them for shopping instead of the big ones.
Participant: I find them a bit stronger anyway, I like the hessian bags, I don’t know, it’s just something perhaps they used to do years ago.
Interviewer: OK and why do you think bag for life has been given this name?
Participant: Well, I don’t like them. I can see the idea that they try to get people to stop buying plastic bags, because obviously you can’t run out of space and things like this with all the recycling stuff. Most people forget about it, I think it’s pointless, it’s wasting people’s time. They’re charging you 5p or what have you for these bags and things and people just, it wouldn’t stop me but it couldn’t stop, or I think the idea was to stop people buying these bags. People will just pass a supermarket, “Oh, I’ll pop in.” They’ve got no bags on them so they’ve got to buy more bags again so it’s just silly.
Interviewer: So why do you prefer to use the heavy-duty ones as compared to, you know, the thinner bags for life?
Participant: I find them a lot stronger and I just prefer them.
Interviewer: And where do you usually store those? Did you say you had them…
Participant: I have one bag of it and then I put the ones that I use back in there and keep them in the car.
Interviewer: So in this way, you don’t need to remember each time you go shopping?
Participant: Yeah, I learned pretty quickly.
Interviewer: Great and another thing I wanted to ask is does it happen to you, anyhow, to have to buy the 5p bag, you know, the single-use plastic bag when you find yourself without any bags?
Participant: No, I just put them in the boot and just carry them back and forth if that situation arose. I just open up the boot, just put them in the boot and then get stuff out of the boot.
Interviewer: So would you say that you never have to buy any bags at all in supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah, yeah. Again, it must be years, possibly, before the last time.
Interviewer: I see, and do you have any plastic bags at home at the moment at all?
Participant: No, I don’t, no.
Interviewer: You don’t and in your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores, in supermarkets?
Participant: They could get rid of them as far as I’m concerned, not at all important to me.
Interviewer: So what do you think would happen if bags would be completely gone from the stores?
Participant: People would have to get the hessian bags and take it back and forward. If a supermarket said, “There’s no more bags here, you have to bring your own bag.” They do it on the continent so why can’t we do it? It doesn’t bother me, as I said, if I didn’t want to get a bag or won’t get a bag, I’ll just put it straight in the boot and carry the products back in and out from the car.
Interviewer: Absolutely.
Participant: I understand for people who haven’t got a car that situation is, it changes, and I suppose if you’re elderly and what have you and you don’t drive or you walk to the local supermarket, you have to have some way of getting it back but then take your bag with you.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: I think it’s about 5p, isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, and what kind of bags is it for?
Participant: Just those thin see-through things. They might put different colours on it but you can’t put anything heavy in the damn things.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what do you think about this 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I thought it was a little bit pointless, no need to charge people 5p for a bag. I can understand they tried to do it to stop people using so many of the bags but I don’t think personally it’s made much of a difference for a lot of people, they’ll just keep buying, it’s only 5p, you can lose more than that down the back of a sofa.
Interviewer: And what do you think is good about plastic bag charges and what is not as good?
Participant: I can’t see any good in it. I suppose if they donate it to a charity or something, the 5ps, that’s all, personally I can’t think of anything good in it.
Interviewer: Do you think it stops people from taking bags in supermarkets, from buying them or not?
Participant: No, I don’t, not at all.
Interviewer: And why do you say so?
Participant: Because, as I said, it’s only 5p. If you go to a certain supermarket and you’re buying a product that is £1.97, let’s say, and then you go to another one and it’s £1.50, and you just pay 5p for another bag, you’re still up.
Interviewer: Would you say that they’ve stopped you from taking any bags from supermarkets?
Participant: No, it hasn’t affected me at all.
Interviewer: So before the charge you were already using your own bags?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve always got paper bags and I just never saw the point of them. Where the hell am I supposed to keep all these carrier bags?
Interviewer: If you happen to have any bags at home, what do you do with them, the plastic ones?
Participant: They’re stored under the sink, or were stored under the sink, we don’t have any at the moment.
Interviewer: And did you used to reuse them anyhow?
Participant: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Participant: For what kind of things?
Participant: I put tins of paint or something in then and put them in the storage. I just liked to find some other use for them, not the ones they’re supposedly designed for. Paint brushes and things I’ve put in them and kept them in a carrier bag.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: To try to stop people using as many, you can’t carry on with [?? 21.31] in carrier bags, I suppose, if you didn’t stop them. But I would have thought they could have, in this day and age, could have made them out of something that would sort of break down over time, not just be left around, it takes so many years to move.
Interviewer: So they take a lot of years, you mentioned, to decompose.
Participant: Yeah, that’s it, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think there are any environmental purposes behind the charge?
Participant: Yeah, as I said, try to get, to stop people keep using them because, as I said, if they take so many years to break down, over time, the more people use, the more we’re going to have bags everywhere. So if they can stop people using them that can only be better for the environment but I can’t see people really, not everybody obviously. I suppose if you get older perhaps then you think about it more but if you’re 20s, they couldn’t care less.
Interviewer: So when the charge was introduced, did you see any changes in terms of how people were using the bags at all? Have you noticed anything?
Participant: None at all, couldn’t see any change. In the queue in a supermarket, you’d hear people say, “Oh, I forgot the bags. Oh, well, never mind, I only need three. Or I only need six.” It didn’t make any difference.
Interviewer: And what do you think about other people taking bags at shops?
Participant: I can’t see the point of it but that’s their choice, I can’t make those decisions for them. You’ve got all of these bags, you’re going to have to put them somewhere or do you just put them in the bin, you know? And then you go through the next week’s shopping, you’re going to start all over again. I don’t agree, not agree with it, I prefer the way I do it, I’m not saying I’m right, not saying they’re wrong, but it’s just the way I prefer to do things.
Interviewer: Absolutely, yeah. And after the charge has been introduced, have you seen any changes in, for instance, urban environment or in nature in terms of the amount of litter hanging about or not?
Participant: No, not at all, I haven’t seen any.
Interviewer: Or is it not something that you were looking at?
Participant: It’s not something I look at.
Interviewer: Sure.
Participant: I have to just run and get the charger for my phone.
Interviewer: OK, great, and do you think that plastic bag charging policy is applied well in Wales?
Participant: No, there’s certainly stores that I know full well they don’t charge anything.
Interviewer: What kind of stores are these?
Participant: Just local convenience stores.
Interviewer: Right, so they will just give them away without paying.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Did you see other people doing that?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve been behind people in the queue in a convenience, you know, where they’ve done that.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s a good situation or not?
Participant: Well, I mean, it’s, I don’t see why people need a carrier bag from a local convenience store. They only sell a limited amount of items.
Interviewer: Fantastic, so I’ll just resume, a few more questions. Yeah, so maybe just another thing to finish with the plastic bag charge and everything. Do you think that bag reuse is encouraged in Wales or in the UK or would you not say so?
Participant: No, I don’t agree, no.
Interviewer: Why would you?
Participant: I haven’t seen any sort of advertising, any sort of campaigns, “Reuse your bags.” It’s just pretty much nothing really. Well, I haven’t noticed if there is any, I haven’t noticed it, it hasn’t stood out to me.
Interviewer: And do you think anything should change in this respect?
Participant: I don’t know whether they’d change people’s habits anyway. The only thing they could do is just stop giving plastic bags. Yeah, just stop it. Everybody’s got one of these hessian bags or whatever or you have to take your own bags, supermarkets are not going to supply any more bags, you need to think about this before you come on your shop. People will soon get it, into the habit, a habit of doing one thing or the other, either not taking any bags, not buying any bags, everything straight in the boot, straight from the boot, straight into the bags.
Interviewer: And you know where the charge applies? For instance, in Wales it is supposed to be applied everywhere even if it’s not in practice always the case but most of it is, because we’ve seen statistics and it looks like in most places it’s still working but, yeah, there are exceptions as usual but, you know, it’s coming to England in October and England is the last part of the UK to introduce it and in England the regulation will be slightly different in terms of, for example, medium to small retailers and corner shops precisely will be exempt from the charge. Do you think this is a good thing or not?
Participant: Why are they doing, why are they just introducing the charge from a supermarket? It’s just silly, you’re trying to do something with one hand tied behind your back and corner shops, I mean, for elderly people they’re going to use them a lot more than other supermarkets because not everybody can get to a supermarket. I just cannot see it’s going to make a blind bit of difference.
Interviewer: So basically what will happen is that supermarket bags will be paid and smaller and medium kind of retailers will not charge.
Participant: Yeah, I just think that’s silly, just do a blanket charge across the board.
Interviewer: Yeah, and the same for takeaways, would you say?
Participant: Yeah, of course.
Interviewer: And how about clothes and shoes kind of shops?
Participant: For everything really. I mean, they don’t have to use these plastic bags all the time. Certain items of clothing anyway come in a package and most people don’t go shopping into a local town anymore because there’s no shops there so they all go to the retail park which means they’ve got a car. Where I live, there’s no, I couldn’t buy a pair of jeans, for argument’s sake, within, what, I’d have to go to Cardiff so we’re talking almost 30 miles just to get a pair of jeans and if I need a few items, I’m not going to jump on the train and think, “I’ve got to carry all this stuff back home.” I’ll go in the car. That’s the problem they’re going to have with Wales. Most, if you lived in big cities, if you live in Cardiff or you live in Reading or whatever, you can get everything you need pretty much on your doorstep. Places like this, you cannot. They’re going to have to have some way of getting things back so people will continue to buy carrier bags in Wales because of that particular reason of getting things back and forth because not everybody has a car. So I can’t see, in England, they should just do a complete charge, that’s it, the same as in Wales. As I said, you always get people who completely ignore that but you’re going to have that in whatever country you’re in.
Interviewer: And how about different types of bags such as biodegradable sort of plastic, it’s actually starch, it looks like plastic but it’s not, those kind of compostable bags and also paper bags, how about those? Because again they will be not charged.
Participant: I’d rather use those.
Interviewer: Yeah, so would you agree with the charge not being applied to paper and biodegradable materials?
Participant: Yeah, encourage people to use those. If you don’t give people the option then they’ll do it without thinking about it. This is the bag I have from a certain store, it’s a paper bag or it’s a biodegradable bag, fine, great, it’s a bag to get my stuff home. That’s all pretty much people care about it. They don’t care whether, I’m saying not everybody, there’s certain people, but if they do it now, “Right, we’re not producing any more plastic bags, it’s all biodegradable” most people would say, “Oh, great. This is still a bag for me to get my shopping home.” Don’t give them the option.
Interviewer: Yeah and another thing I wanted to ask you about is how do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges? One would be higher fuel duties because there is obviously a lot of car-related pollution.
Participant: Not as much as people make out because they’re all on about these Toyota Prius’, they’re really great for the environment. Marvellous, yeah, apart from they’re made in America and then they’ve got to ship them all the way to Japan to get them from Japan and then ship back out. That’s using a damn sight more, making more pollution than is made in just one country. And people who go on about electric cars, where do they think the electricity is going to come from? That doesn’t create pollution, I think it does. There is enough charge on fuel as it is, it’s absolutely disgraceful, the actual fuel would be a damn sight cheaper for the government if they kept down this amount of tax they take off it and people would, I think, they think less of it. I don’t agree with this myth, as far as I’m concerned, that cars and things are major pollution. They’re not, not compared to anything else, not compared to big manufacturers, factories and steel works and this, that and the other are chucking out God knows what. No.
Interviewer: And how does plastic bag charge compare to higher fuel duties?
Participant: Most people haven’t got a car so they’re not using any fuel duty. My mother doesn’t drive, she can go to a local supermarket, she’s got a bag, so why should we have to pay extra fuel duty when she’s not even using a car?
Interviewer: No, no, her fuel duty would be only for, it’s basically petrol prices going up.
Participant: I think, no, petrol prices should come down. I don’t agree with putting extra on fuel duties at all.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how about a different type of, it’s not really a charge, it’s like a small deposit that people will need to pay for plastic, when they buy drinks in plastic bottles? So basically when they buy a drink, they put in maybe like a small deposit, a few pence, and when they bring the bottle back instead of chucking it away, when they bring it back to the outlet, they get the deposit back. What do you think about that?
Participant: Yes, that’s a good idea. They do that in Austria with, you can go to a local supermarket there and you buy a crate of beer, for argument’s sake, and you take the crates back. When you first start, you pay a deposit or what have you, but then you keep taking them back and back and back. We used to do that years ago on bottles of pop when I was younger. You know, you’d get money back on the bottles, good idea.
Interviewer: Fantastic. What do you think will happen in about 10 years’ time, after the plastic bag charge has been introduced in Wales, if anything?
Participant: I don’t think it’ll make any difference, people will still continue doing what they’re doing now. It will be exactly the same.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, just a couple more questions before we finish. Would you say that the environment is important for you at all?
Participant: More now than when I was younger because I’ve got my grandkids so you think, “We need to do something for them,” well, for everybody I suppose. I love going out into the countryside, it’s beautiful and it’s great and so it should be. But, for younger ones, they only live for today, they don’t care about tomorrow. So I think a lot of it is age related. I’m not saying everybody, there will be the odd younger ones that are concerned but the majority, the ones I’ve come across, they don’t worry about tomorrow. As you get older and you have a family and you have grandchildren and great grandchildren and whatever, then it becomes more, you think about it a lot more.
Interviewer: Would you say that, for you, the environment is as important as social, economic or health issues in the country?
Participant: Oh, yes, of course. Yeah, they should all be on a par.
Interviewer: And why is it just as important as other areas?
Participant: We can’t do without out and, you know, we need to look after it for future generations. I want my grandson to grow up in a place that he can go out and breathe fresh air and this, that, whatever, and go out into the country. That’s the way it should be but, as I said, when I was younger I couldn’t care less.
Interviewer: And do you feel that nowadays you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: I’ve always been interested in the news anyway, it’s something I’ve done since I was a child so I do take a lot of interest, which is why I said about these Prius’ and things like that. They don’t take into account the ships it’s going to take to transfer them across from one side of the world to the other, what pollution is that creating? Bits are manufactured in Japan and then it’s shipped back out again, more pollution again. So I think I don’t agree with a lot of what they say about cars, at all. Not that I’m a big car fanatic but if they could get the, these big production companies, the manufacturing companies, if they looked at their waste and the amount of pollution they produce, I’m sure they could cut that down a lot more than they are.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment nowadays or not?
Participant: Yeah, I can do what I can. I’ve always turned the tap when I’m brushing my teeth or what have you, lights off, this, that and the other. I mean, I can’t make a significant dent in it, everybody would have to do the same and until people’s habits change, and if you can get people to change their habits without them having to think they’re changing their habits, I think you stand a bit more chance.
Interviewer: And how about recycling in your area? How do you find it and what do you yourself do with the waste?
Participant: There’s not a great deal of it going on around here.
Interviewer: What kind of bins do you have?
Participant: We have a recycling bin, we have a food waste bin and I have a general waste bin but we don’t have anything foodwise really, the odd potato peelings now and again but the vegetable peel, I have rabbits so the rabbits have the vegetables. I don’t produce a lot, to be honest.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the solid waste? The non-organic waste like paper, cardboard, plastic things.
Participant: Yeah, I put that in the recycling bin, not that I have much, to be honest, because the vegetables I use, if I can get them without a bag, I’ll do that straight away. I’d rather pick my own and choose my own what I’m going to use and I put them in a special tray thing in the bottom of the fridge, you know?
Interviewer: Sure, and do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not? In terms of from the government, from environmental organisations or companies?
Participant: I think a lot of them try to force whatever issues they think are important upon people, so that’s all you really see. There’s not enough information but the only information they give you is one sided, I find.
Interviewer: So how do you think it should change, if you were to give advice?
Participant: You could give people a lot more information and change things subtly.
Interviewer: What kind of information?
Participant: Show people where these bags and, show them after 10, 20, 30 years with an image. “We carry on using these or we’re all going to change to biodegradable things where this is a certain area of X amount of bags in 10 years’ time” and there’s an image, “and this is certain image of exactly the same amount bags.” And people think, “Oh, my God, why the hell are we using those?” If people can see the difference, I think you can get more response. So more information, more leaflets, not necessarily TV adverts because a lot of people will, if they have Sky, for argument’s sake, like I have myself, I’ll change channels or if I record things, I just speed it through an advert. I very rarely watch an advert. If something is coming through the doors or, for me, on the news perhaps but again, more broader, not just what they want you to hear or what suits them, the government and things to tell you.
Interviewer: Sure. Thank you very much, Andrew. I think this is it for the questions that I had.