Interviewer: ...the diary filling experience overall, how was it?
Participant: I enjoyed doing it, really, and it was good that there was reminders sent to me nightly.
Interviewer: Oh, that's nice, yeah. What did you like about it?
Participant: Well, I enjoyed filling it in, I used to fill, I know it's slightly different, I used to fill in a diary years ago and then I stopped. It was interesting, really, the things that you were interested in. I don't know whether, really, my sort of shopping habits were typical of other people, but I tend not to shop a lot in supermarkets, I don't see them to be particularly cheap, I don't see it to be a good way, really, of buying food. I'd rather sort of go to a butchers where you can buy, you know, the exact amount of meat and that that you want. I like going to greengrocers every now and again and getting whatever amount of vegetables and that that I want there. Again, a lot of the vegetables in supermarkets are sort of pre-packed in plastic bags, which I don't feel is a very good thing for the environment, I don't feel it's very good for the taste of the food, to be packed in there. Again, with my bread, I always go down to the local, actual bakers, which is local to where I live, and [?? 01:33] is cheaper to buy the bread, it's fresh because you go down there and it's still warm, it's been cooked that day. And, again, the packaging and that, you know, it's not bad for the environment, because you go down there and you can have it fresh and you can have it open, and you can go down there with a bag yourself and have as many bread rolls as you want. I'm just not keen on shopping in supermarkets, really, at all.
Interviewer: And would you say that your local area provides you with all these possibilities of, you know, buying at small, you know, producers and local shops or do you need to go somewhere for that?
Participant: Well, my bakery, it's, that's sort of ten minutes’ walk from where I live, so that's fine. I can't really get fresh vegetables where I live, I'd have to go and get them somewhere else.
Interviewer: And where would that be?
Participant: It really depends, if I go to a market, perhaps I will buy from there. Again, they're not all pre-packed and that there, are they, I can pick up the exact amount I want, there's no plastic bags. I really, really feel that vegetables don't taste the same when they're shrink-wrapped, swedes and goodness knows what. I’d much rather go there with a bag, buy whatever amount of vegetables I want. Around the valley towns here there's always markets every week, you know, where you can go and pick up whatever amount of fresh vegetables that you want. Again, then, go into the butchers and buy in the meat, it's not all pre-packed, it's there, fresh, behind the counter, literally just have what you want from there. I feel it's a cheaper way, as well, of living, because I really don't think supermarkets are cheap. The amount of packaging and that, really, for the environment is ludicrous, because everything is pre-packed in plastic bags, shrink-wrapped, there's no need for any of it, really. I mean, when you take, for argument, take a swede, a swede is designed to be peeled anyway, what's the point in putting it in packaging. Potatoes, again, they’re designed to be peeled, I just don't like shopping and getting additional waste and paying for the privilege of them being packed up in things I don't want.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see. And, again, coming back to the diary experience, was there anything difficult for you to write down or not?
Participant: Well, I think I couldn't really get my point across on there, that I wasn't a typical shopper going to the supermarket and doing a big sort of weekly shop.
Interviewer: That's fine, you know, that's okay.
Participant: I'm not one for going and buying, I never ever buy sort of frozen lasagnes or anything like that, whatever I cook is normally fresh, you know, so the ingredients are there and I make, I cook fresh food whenever I'm there.
Interviewer: Yeah, and did anything surprise you at all in the diary?
Participant: No, not really. I mean, I noticed on there, again, that you are interested in things like switching off lights and that when you're not in the room, you know, turning off the tap when you're brushing your teeth. To me these are things that I've always done, you know, electricity, obviously is no good for the environment, if everybody was burning the amount that's, willy-nilly, leaving lights on, TVs and goodness knows what. So I've always turned things off, from the two points of view that it's saving money and it's better for the environment.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely. Now, again, you know, you just started speaking now about the way you shop, how many times a week or a month do you go to buy food? Maybe a week, I would imagine? Because you don't do it [?? 05:43]
Participant: We don't eat a great deal, no. I, you know, perhaps a loaf of bread now could last us a week. If I have one slice of toast, if my husband has one slice, now and again, then, I would have porridge, so I wouldn't eat bread then. So I wouldn't say that, I mean, it's not like I've got a family now, where a family regularly go, so I don't need to shop as often now. So it's really a case of when I'm running low on provisions, again, you know, and I don't buy vegetables in packets and things, so they tend to last a while, anyway, if they're kept in the bottom of the fridge, I normally keep veg and it's all out of any wrapping, so it...
Interviewer: So would you say you go to buy food maybe once a week or a bit more frequently or less frequently?
Participant: Yeah, less frequently than that, yeah.
Interviewer: And so you mentioned all these local shops here where you go to buy food, and market, yeah. So these are the, do you any, you know, do you go at all to like farm shops or anything like this?
Participant: I do like farm shops, but, again, I think that they are a little bit of a con, because I think that they hike up the price on them straight away. You know, because I like buying food the way that I do, I have always gone and had a little look at farm markets when they have been around the area, but I think that they are well over-priced. I mean, we've had like chicken, two chicken breasts where it's organic, and perhaps it's been five pound. Well, that's been way out of my budget. You know, if I go into markets and buy in the vegetables and that, I'm getting what I need, I go into the butchers and I find there's that, if I buy a little bit in bulk when I go there, perhaps I would buy the whole leg of pork. That would last us ages, a long, long time, lots of meals out of that.
Interviewer: Do you freeze that when you buy it?
Participant: Yes, I do, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: So you kind of cut it, pre-cut it and then freeze it?
Participant: Yeah, cut it into whatever I think, maybe a couple of joints to do a roast and a couple of chops, whatever. Chicken, as well, I'll either cut them up, cut them in half and perhaps cook them in a spatchcock way. But I wouldn't say that I've got any sort of regular pattern of shopping these days.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Literally seeing what's on offer when I go there. I certainly don't ever make a list, I mean, the same sort of food, really, that we have. I won't eat lamb, I've never tasted lamb, and I wouldn't like to, so it's normally pork, chicken, beef. Seeing what sort of cuts and that are on offer, and then when I go in, then I think, "Oh right, that's whatever joint". Sometimes I would buy pork loin if it was on offer, normally it would be leg or shoulder. If pork loin is particularly cheap, I'd buy quite a bit of that and that would be cut up then for pork loin steaks. But, I mean, I have done loin, I have done steaks out of pork leg.
Interviewer: And, apart from the price, what is important for you when you choose the food?
Participant: Well, fresh. I always buy sort of British meat if I can, and, again, I think, when you're buying meat fresh and you're buying vegetables fresh, there's less chance of additives and goodness knows what, and I've got a thyroid problem, anyway, and I think that, I don't like the thought of a lot of these foods that have got different additives and preservatives and goodness knows what.
Interviewer: And what is less important for you when you buy food?
Participant: What is less important?
Interviewer: Yeah, not as important, yeah.
Participant: Well, from the point of view that I buy what's on offer, so I wouldn't think to myself, "Right, we're going to go and we're having chickens, and we will have chickens whatever the cost", it literally is a case of what is a good buy. The money has got to come, the money and the fact that it's local food and not been tampered with and, that's the sort of thing that I go for, that's the important things.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see. And, when you go food shopping, how do you go there? Do you take your car, if you have a car, or do you, you know, walk or use public transport?
Participant: Well, if there's a market local, I go in the car, I wouldn't have one in my local sort of village, so I couldn't walk to there. Walk to the bakers. I work as a carer, so if I'm heading to work or coming home from work and I know that there's a local market where I actually work, I'll pop there and I'll get some vegetables on the way there or back. I tend to try not to go out of my way to go driving off to go buying food, I think I've always planned it pretty well that I've picked it up to or from work, so you've saved a journey, really, then, haven't I. I don't like driving anyway, there's too many cars on the road, and if I was going to buy, maybe Christmas time I might come down to Cardiff and buy some meat out of the butchers and have a, I would definitely take public transport then, I wouldn't consider taking the car.
Interviewer: And why would you do that by public transport rather than the car?
Participant: Well, cost, environmental issues, and the fact that I don't like driving, so it's a combination of the three.
Interviewer: And, when you go food shopping, do you really go on your own or do you go with someone?
Participant: Mostly on my own because it's done when I'm going to or from work, so it's very rare, really, there's anybody with me.
Interviewer: And another question, you know, regarding the food, I wanted to ask, is does it happen to you to have some products at home that have not been used and they go to waste, or is it...?
Participant: Oh, I don't believe in waste at all, definitely not, I wouldn't buy things unless I was adamant they were going to be used. I'm not one of these that goes out and impulse, buys, again, this is probably down to the fact that I don't supermarket shop, because I think a lot of people could go into the supermarket and get carried away with buying things they don't want. I mean, if I've got the basics, if I've got bread, I've got meat, I've got vegetables, I'm not going to be going in buying other silly things that there's no need to buy.
Interviewer: So would you say that you produce no food waste or almost none?
Participant: Definitely no food waste. If there was anything over, say, from a cooked dinner, it would be given to the dog anyway.
Interviewer: I see, oh yeah, that's practical [laughs] dogs are the best for that, yeah.
Participant: Well, it's good for the dog to have a cooked dinner, there's no waste then, is there, to be throwing out food when you've paid for it, and, again, the waste, the gas that comes off food waste is unbelievable, isn't it.
Interviewer: That's true.
Participant: I mean, this, again, is why I'll buy like a leg of pork and cut into small joints. You know, a lot of the time people, if they're going into supermarkets, they're limited to what size piece of meat they can buy, they perhaps can't get something smaller enough.
Interviewer: Another thing I wanted to ask you about, Carol, is slightly unusual. Could you tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Waste [laughs], extravagance.
Interviewer: Extravagance, hmm, mmm.
Participant: Yeah. Pointless, really. I can't think of anything else, really.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, that's fine, yeah. And do you remember at all, you know, that point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time, how did they appear?
Participant: You know, I can't really remember that because when I was younger, I mean, a lot of it as well perhaps goes back to my childhood, because my father was a farmer, so growing up, fruit and veg would always be whatever was in season, whatever was grown, never ever went and had fruit or veg from a supermarket. I must have been about 12 before I tasted a frozen burger, because, again, we were brought up that we had proper cooked food, you know, joints of meat cooked, there wasn't convenience meals bought. It's got to be, really, I suppose, when I had my children that I went into supermarkets and, you know, sort of noticed the packaging of everything.
Interviewer: So, at some point you used to go to supermarkets and buy things, when your children were younger, yeah?
Participant: Well, I would tend then to go in and get things like tins of baked beans and that, to go with different things they had, you know, cereal and that, they went through quite a lot, I used to go to supermarkets for that. I mean, I normally now have porridge or toast anyway, I wouldn't go buying anything other than that, there's no need.
Interviewer: And do you get sometimes bits and pieces from supermarkets nowadays?
Participant: No, no, not if I can help it.
Interviewer: Would you just, where would you get, you know, milk and things like that? Would that be a smaller corner shop or something like that?
Participant: Well, Home Bargains, or BM Bargains, you get anything like that there. Toilet rolls, toiletries, cleaning things, so there really is no need to supermarket shop.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, so it's like smaller outlets, basically, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags do you use, or containers do you use to pack your shopping normally?
Participant: I don't know whether you've ever seen them, you can get these material bags that are like, they're 99p, and they fit into a little pouch thing. I've got a lot of them, and the good thing with them as well, you see, is, if you've used them and you've used them for meat, when you get home you can throw them in the washing machine. So, if you haven't bought anything like meat and got to wash them, I just put them back, on the back of the door, and if I've bought anything at all that I feel it needs to be washed, I always wash when I buy meat.
Interviewer: Yeah, that's practical. And do you always bring those with you when you go shopping?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to forget to take them or not?
Participant: No. Well, I've normally got them in the boot anyway.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, so do you store them in the car boot?
Participant: I store some, there's normally one or two in the boot, the bulk of them are on the back of my kitchen door.
Interviewer: And these are kind of bags for life, are they?
Participant: Well, they're material bags, they're not these bags for life. Again, they're normally plastic ones, aren't they, and a lot of these, if you've bought meat and that, how can you continue using a bag for life when you've perhaps had chickens and that in there, I don't feel that to be very hygienic, really, at all.
Interviewer: And these ones, how big are they, those that you use?
Participant: Well, they would carry about the same amount as a carrier bag would.
Interviewer: I see what they are, yeah, absolutely, yeah. And why do you think bags for life have been given this name, do you have an idea?
Participant: Well, they supposedly, you carry on using them, and if they break you go back and take them and they will replace it. But, you know, from what I've seen, anyway, a lot of people end up, you know, carrier bags in Wales, obviously, have been charged for for quite some time, and these thicker ones are just taking longer to break down. I don't really know anyone that actually re-uses them, so they're paying out for a bag that's thicker, that's going to take longer to break down and worse for the environment, so I don't really see it as being anything but, as being useful.
Interviewer: And do you have any of those at home yourself?
Participant: I don't think so, I think I've had them in the past when perhaps I've had an order of an Avon product and somebody's brought it to me and they've brought it in a plastic bag, and normally then I would use that for some sort of rubbish.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, yeah.
Participant: You know, I don't think they’re very hygienic to be able to keep using them anyway.
Interviewer: In your opinion, how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores or in supermarkets?
Participant: Well, I suppose people have got to use them, haven't they, if they're taking their own there, but I know I don't think that, I don't think this idea of the bags for life has done anything any good for anybody, really, apart from perhaps bringing in a bit of revenue.
Interviewer: What would happen if they completely disappeared from the shops?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: What would happen, do you think, if they completely disappeared from the shops, the plastic bags?
Participant: Well, I suppose if they completely disappeared, people would have to bring their own bags, wouldn't they, or they'd have to go back to, years ago, people would buy things and put them in boxes, which used to be hanging around the supermarkets, perhaps they'd go back to doing that again.
Interviewer: So that wouldn't be a problem from your point of view?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Now I would like to, you know, obviously you live in Wales, and do you know what is plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it's between about five pence to twelve pence.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags are charged this price?
Participant: Well, any of the plastic ones, isn't it, normally the thinner plastic ones are cheaper, the thicker plastic ones are the dearer ones, I think, yeah.
Interviewer: And in what context have you heard about this plastic bags charge for the first time, or when?
Participant: Well, just word of mouth, really, with people talking about it.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this charge?
Participant: I can see why they tried to do it for start but it hasn't worked, has it, because people are not re-using the bags, they're just buying them all the time and the thicker bags are taking longer to break down.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that the charge has been introduced?
Participant: Not really. I suppose they're trying to stop so much plastic, aren't they. I don't understand, then, why they don't start by vegetables and that in the shop, of just selling them loose, and maybe even with, you know, the brown bags, perhaps with the, not as long to break down, perhaps not as bad for the environment.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you do not particularly like about the plastic bag charge, or not, or do you think it's a really good thing?
Participant: Well, because it doesn't really make any difference, you know, it doesn't affect me, does it, one way or another, but I can see why they brought it in, but it's not working, I don't think, from what I can see, no.
Interviewer: And did you hear about this charge coming into effect in England in October or not?
Participant: Yeah, I think I did hear it somewhere, but I can't remember. Again, it would have been somebody had just said it.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, yeah. What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: What do I think the main...?
Interviewer: The main purpose is, why...?
Participant: Well, they've done it, haven't they, to stop people using so much of the plastic bags, I presume. So they did it so that if plastic bags were bought, they bought a bag for life and kept re-using them.
Interviewer: And is there any kind of expected effects on the environment, do you think?
Participant: Well, obviously plastic takes a long time to break down, doesn't it? So the thicker ones now are going to take longer again, and, as I've said all along, I don't feel that if people are going out and buying meat and that, that they're hygienic, to continue using the same one. If you've got chicken juices or something in a bag and then you've got to perhaps put a loaf of bread in there, whereas if you've got more of these material, thin ones that can actually go through a wash when you've used them, if need be, surely that would be better.
Interviewer: You did mention that somehow the plastic bag charge doesn't affect you, whether it exists or not, because you are bringing your own bags, but has it still produced any kind of effect on yourself, you know, in terms of your shopping behaviour, in terms of your thinking, has that produced any change at all?
Participant: [Sighs] No, I wouldn't really say so. I think that, as I said, I used to go to supermarkets with the children at home, I think, as I've got older I've got far more aware of being more careful with money, of thinking more environmentally since I've had grandchildren, the children are growing up, where's all the rubbish going to go? So it's nothing, really, to do with the cost of the carrier bags because, as I said at the beginning of our conversation, I don't agree with vegetables and that put into plastic bags. I mean, potatoes and that sweat anyway when they're in a plastic bag, you know, they're not designed to be kept like that.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag re-use is sufficiently encouraged in the UK or not?
Participant: I wouldn't really know about that.
Interviewer: Or in Wales, you know, where you live, do you think, you know, bag re-use, the re-use of bags is encouraged or not?
Participant: I don't know, I mean, I don't know whether they say to them then when they go into the supermarket, "Have you brought your own bag?", or, they probably do, don't they, you know, "Do you want a bag?", sort of thing.
Interviewer: And you know what will happen in England, I think in Wales the charges apply to mostly everything, or probably every kind of different bag you have to pay 5p for it?
Participant: Well, I know that the local shop, if anybody goes there, you haven't got to pay for one there. They usually give you a bag in the local shop sort of thing.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what will happen in England from October is that there will be some types of bags and some types of shops that will not charge, and I just wanted to ask you whether you think it's, you know, the right situation or not. Like medium and small retailers and corner shops will be exempt from it, so you will have bags there for free. Do you think it's the right situation or not?
Participant: Well, maybe then it might encourage a little bit more trade for the little corner shop and that, because they've got it hard, haven't they. If they can give a free bag, that might be something that would attract more people to use them more often. I mean...
Interviewer: So would you say it's the right thing to do for them?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I don't see why not, and they normally have only got the thin bags anyway, haven't they, it's not as if they've got the thick ones that take forever to break down.
Interviewer: And how about, you know, hot food takeaways?
Participant: Again, takeaways, they use the bags, don't they, but, again, they use the very thin bags. I mean, they couldn't re-use it, could they, and I suppose, you know, there's probably, they're not going to miss a couple of pence for carrier bags are they, with what they charge on a takeaway.
Interviewer: So you think that's okay if people did not pay in takeaways for the bag?
Participant: Yeah, they're not, you know, it's not as if they're thick, heavy plastic ones, is it.
Interviewer: And compared, you know, to other charges, for example, higher fuel duties, you know, the petrol prices put slightly higher than they actually are, so this is, you know, one of the environmental taxes that exists in other countries. Compared to these kind of taxes on petrol, how does, you know, how does the plastic bag charge look in relation to that, what would you say? Would you, you know, because you are sort of in favour a little bit of the plastic bag charge, isn't it, or not?
Participant: I don't know whether I would say I'm in favour of it. I can see why they did it, but I don't think that it worked.
Interviewer: That's what you were saying, exactly, yeah. So how does plastic bag charge, in your opinion, compare to a rise in fuel duties, in fuel prices?
Participant: Well, the fuel price is normally quite a bit more than 5p, don't they, when they've gone up.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I mean, I don't know whether it, you know, if the local council started giving people reduction maybe in the Council Tax for recycling more and things like that, maybe that would have been a little bit more beneficial than this idea with the carrier bags. If people are actually rewarded for recycling.
Interviewer: And, for example, something like, if there was a little deposit on plastic bottles that people would need to pay ahead, and then, you know, get it back when they bring the empty plastic bottle or packaging to the outlet, what would you say about that compared to the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, that's quite a good idea, isn't it, but, again, they've got a lot of it to get rid it then, the companies, haven't they, how would they dispose of all that? Would they end up having to pay to dispose of it so the prices would go up anyway?
Interviewer: And what do you think would happen in about ten years’ time, after the introduction of the plastic bag charge? So it exists now already for a couple of years, and what do you think will happen in, probably, ten years’ time.
Participant: Well, I think that in ten years they're going to look at it and see that there's been a hell of a lot more plastic than what there was ten years previously.
Interviewer: And what makes you think to say that there is more plastic right now?
Participant: Well, because they've got this idea of the thicker bags, haven't they. They're obviously going to take a lot longer to break down, aren't they?
Interviewer: So you think people take more bags for life, basically, than the thinner bags?
Participant: Well, I think everybody that I know around, anyway, uses those plastic bags for rubbish, I don't know anyone that actually re-uses them to take them back to the shop.
Interviewer: Yeah. Speaking about other things that we usually do at home, do you tend to save water and energy at your place?
Participant: Definitely, I mean, the energy for a start, energy bills are extremely high. I'm probably paying more for my electricity now than twenty eight years ago when I bought my house on a mortgage, so if you look at it like that, you know, they've gone through the roof, anyway, haven't they. I've never been keen, you know, even regardless of cost, when the children were younger, if they used to say to me they were cold, I'd always say to them, "Put another jumper on". I don't like actually being too warm if you're at home and you're cleaning up and that and you've got the heating on, it actually makes me feel quite sick. I'd rather, what I've always done anyway, if I put the heating on, perhaps an hour in the morning, hour in the night to take the chill off, and that's it. I mean, whether that will alter as we get a bit older and may feel the cold a bit more, I don't know, but I'm not keen on it too warm anyway, and, you know, with the electricity, even if there wasn't an environmental issue about it, you're looking at, the cost is just extortionate.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely. And how about water?
Participant: Well, I haven't got a water meter, but I've never really been one for wasting water. I've got water butts and that in the garden that I use, either on the plants or I use it to clean up, we've got like a little patio area for the dogs to use the toilet, so I collect water and, you know, that's used to clean that area down as well. That just saves me having to go in and carry water from the house through.
Interviewer: And why do you do that?
Participant: Well, buckets of water, for a start, they're going to be heavy to carry right through the house, to take out. And why not use the rainwater, in nit, you know, when I was younger my grandfather always had a big water butt in the garden, and I used to think it was good to go and collect the water from there and water the plants. I've always just sort of done the same, really, but whereas I haven't got a water butt, I've got buckets around.
Interviewer: And do you tend to re-use things at home at all, you know, any kind of, you know, different things that, you know, different objects, can be something like, you know, from the packaging, that you can keep, or magazines, newspapers or anything else?
Participant: If I've had any newspapers from my son, I normally hang onto them and I'll use them perhaps to clean the windows and that, so I sort of re-use things like that. Paper's very, very good to clean a window with. If I need anything I always have a little look around and say, "Oh, that coat would be handy for the winter", or, you know, I'm not the type really to go throwing anything out if it can be fixed or re-used. The same with furniture and that, you know, if you can have it recovered and hang onto it another five years or something, I would go for that option.
Interviewer: And what do you do with your household waste?
Participant: Well, if I have got, we've got a very, very simple recycling system where I live. We haven't got a load of different bins. We've got, like we've had fliers through the door telling us things we can recycle, and also one that, as we open the bin up, there's a sticker on there showing what can be recycled and what can't, so everything that can be recycled is put in the recycling bin. There's very, very little waste then that I would have. The only real waste that I have that can't be recycled is egg shells or chicken bones and, you know, food that's been thrown out is given to the dogs, and I know that my plastic bottles, inserts for the toilet rolls and everything can be recycled so they just go straight into the recycling bin.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to buy, you know, any kind of eco-friendly or fair trade products or, you know, organic, sustainable...?
Participant: I have actually bought the eco-friendly washing up liquid, and I've got to be honest, I didn't find it very effective.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Whether or not it was the make, I don't know, but it wasn't a cheap one, but I was very, very disappointed with it.
Interviewer: And what made you think, what made you buy it?
Participant: I don't know, I must have seen it in Home Bargains or something, a good price, and thought, "I'll give that a try".
Interviewer: And, about your driving, you said that you do tend to drive to work, I mean, you need to drive to work and then also sometimes for shopping. How often do you drive?
Participant: Well, it literally is only if I'm going to work because I would double up then and get shopping while I was out, either going to work or coming from, but I wouldn't make a special journey to go shopping. It depends whether I'm doing two shifts, four shifts, whatever, a week. I mean, at Christmas time, when I'm doing Christmas shopping, I go on the train and go down to Cardiff. Again, I've got a good train service here, it's a hell of a lot cheaper than the car, better for the environment and I haven't got the stress of taking the car. So it's a win, win situation for me.
Interviewer: And do you tend to drive in the way that you save the fuel or you just drive?
Participant: I'm not a fast driver, anyway, never have been, I don't like speed. There's a lot of cars on the road now compared to when I passed my driving test, and, you know, I drive an automatic car anyway, so I'm not up and down the gears. But I don't go fast.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to choose between driving and walking somewhere?
Participant: If I can get there on foot or public transport, that's what I would do.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to support environmental organisations and issues at all?
Participant: Such as...?
Interviewer: Such as, for example, you know, do you, some kind of monetary donation to an environment organisation or sign a petition, something like that?
Participant: Well, if there was a petition that I fancy now, if I agreed with it, I would, yeah, but we don't get, tend to get things like that around the valleys here.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure.
Participant: I don't make any donations to anything, though, at the moment, I, or sort of money, you know, money sort of problems of my own, so I've got no surplus cash.
Interviewer: And what does it mean to you to be environmentally friendly?
Participant: Well, it's important for the future, isn't it? I think it brings it home to you more when you've got children, you've got grandchildren, and you think about the environment and the ozone and deodorant, aerosols, food waste gases and everything, you know, what's going to happen, like in the future? I mean, from where I live to Merthyr if ever I go past, I can smell the rubbish and that, you know, where are they going to put it all in time to come. And I think that supermarkets and that have got, I know we're going back to that again, they've got a big responsibility for that, and they've got to stop packing things up that don't need to be packed up.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about environmental issues? Would you say it's an important issue for you?
Participant: Well, it's definitely important, especially when you have quite young grandchildren, and you've got children growing up, and you think, you know, "Well, what's the future going to be like?". We've all got to take responsibility, haven't we?
Interviewer: Absolutely, yeah. Would you say that environment is an important part of yourself, like your identity, or of your life?
Participant: Yeah, I would, yeah, I think it is, yeah.
Interviewer: And, again, if you could, you know, just kind of give, maybe, examples, or tell why?
Participant: Well, if you're doing everything, you’re recycling what you can, you're thinking about products that you're buying that have got unnecessary packaging, you know, that's all really you can do, I think, isn't it. And if everybody did their little bit, things would be that little bit better.
Interviewer: And, for you, compared to other issues in the modern society that we currently have, such as, you know, social, economic and health, etc, how important is environment compared to those, for yourself?
Participant: Well, I think health is first, environment should be next.
Interviewer: And on social and economic things, like employment?
Participant: Well, economics, after that, social, very low.
Interviewer: And why health and environment come first for you?
Participant: Well, if you haven’t got your health, you haven’t got anything, have you?.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: If your health is gone, nothing else really is going to be important then, that's always got to come first. And environment, we all want to live in a good, clean environment, don't we.
Interviewer: Yeah. And why is it important that we live in a good and clean environment?
Participant: Well, we wouldn't want rubbish and smelly food and that everywhere and rats and goodness knows what, would we, and land fill sites everywhere and gases.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you yourself, you know, know enough about environmental issues or have, you know, sufficient knowledge and skills to act pro-environmentally?
Participant: Yeah, I can't really see that there's anything, you know, that I don't know. I know that things have got to be recycled, I know that waste is something that can't go on and that.
Interviewer: And, if you had a chance, do you think you would have liked to sort of improve your knowledge and your skills around the environmental field or not?
Participant: No, I don't think so, not really, no.
Interviewer: So would you say that you are just, you kind of, you are fine with them, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I mean, I think that life has got to come next, hasn't it, you know, it's a hard balance anyway of juggling, having a home, having to work, having family, having children, grandchildren, extended family, without looking at taking on anything more. Maybe people that haven't quite got as much going on in their lives, and looking for something more, perhaps they'd be more interested maybe in getting involved further in depth about environment, I don't know.
Interviewer: And do you think that Government and environmental organisations, or probably even private companies, provide sufficient support to, you know, people to be able to be environmentally friendly or not? What's your opinion on it?
Participant: Well, if the facilities are there to recycle and you don't take them up, you know, really. I think that they are coming, somebody has said that they were going to have inspections made, coming out when the bins were due to be collected with recycling, and checking that people were doing it correctly. I don't really know whether Government can do other than maybe reward people for doing more recycling.
Interviewer: Would that be the sort of the only thing or would there be anything else that you think people, you know, need to be helped with, you know, externally?
Participant: Well, if they're getting fliers and that coming around and telling them what can be recycled, what days to put the bins out, what not to recycle, I feel they're doing everything, really, then, that they...
Interviewer: Yeah. And do you think like regulations and legislation should be also, you know, helping that or not?
Participant: Yes, I suppose so, yeah.
Interviewer: So more formal rules as well about this, yeah?
Participant: Yeah. They could definitely do more with the supermarkets, couldn't they, stopping their amount of waste, unnecessary packaging, they could surely do something about that.
Interviewer: And maybe, you know, the last thing I wanted to ask you about is about your neighbourhood. So what do you like about your neighbourhood currently and what are the, you know, the sort of signs that you find a little bit problematic for yourself personally or for, you know, for people?
Participant: What I like about my neighbourhood is, at the moment, now, where I live, there's quite a bit of greenery, they haven't come in and built on every little bit of land that's, we can see trees and grass. This is one of the good things of living in one of the villages rather than a city. The only thing I would say about the neighbourhood is that, again, some of the older type houses that have fallen into disrepair, where people have died or perhaps the youngsters are not interested in buying older type properties. I think that perhaps the Council or the Government could do a little bit more to help that out and, you know, perhaps encourage the youngsters to take on these properties, rather them being derelict and making a place look run down. Again, all about recycling, if they said to them then, "If you bought one of these older properties, while you're doing it up, you could have a few years off with the Council Tax, or half price with the Council Tax", while they were getting things together, rather than carrying on, keep on and on building, building and building everywhere when there are houses that are empty that people are not encouraged to go for.
Interviewer: And what do you think about litter in your neighbourhood, or, you know, any kind of vandalism or antisocial issues, is there anything like this or not really?
Participant: Well, there is a small amount of antisocial behaviour now, everywhere, isn't there, but, you know, in all fairness, our area's pretty clean and there's litter pickers around, so you don't really see a lot of rubbish. You do sometimes on the greenery, because there's a common going from Romney over to Tredegar and sometimes you've got washing machines and that and they were, I could never understand why, I think the Council collect them free of charge, but somebody's gone to the trouble of getting them up there and pulling them out of a car or a van and just dumping them on the roadside. I can't understand why people do things like that.
Interviewer: And do you find any litter related to plastic bags, you know, on the streets or, you know, kind of urban area?
Participant: No, I haven't seen any.
Interviewer: Not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, great. Well, we've kind of covered really nicely, you know, all the questions that I had, some really, you know, very, thank you very much for the interview, it's been really interesting. Is there anything that you would like to add or to emphasise to what we've been talking about?
Participant: No, not really. You know, that's my biggest concern, really, is that the supermarkets now [?? 50:08] you know, they've made all this fuss of charging for carrier bags and packing things up that don't need to be packed into plastic, that doesn't make any sense.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, alright.