Interviewer: So maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It was easy, I just... I tried to do it at the same sort of time most evenings, kind of like once I’d had my tea and cleared everything away. But it was a bit of a strange week for me anyway ‘cos one of the weekends my children were with their dad so and I was at a wedding so I didn’t really have any shopping or any food waste or anything like that, or recycling, and then the following week it was a little bit mental ‘cos it was my birthday and I’d done a party and then I had loads of recycling and loads of waste.
Interviewer: Right, yeah, but that’s you know...
Participant: That’s just how life rolls isn’t it [laughs]?
Interviewer: Yeah, sometimes it happens anyway isn’t it so, yeah, that’s fine, that’s no problem. And what did you find, you know, easy and what did you like in it and also the opposite sides, what did you find probably difficult to write down or any kind of things you sort of...
Participant: I found it all okay, I can’t say I thought anything was... what I would say I did find is I repeated myself a lot and I didn’t mean to but a lot of the things I do were switching things off at the plug when I finish using them in the kitchen, it’s kind of a natural thing that I do and I kind of felt, oh am I wasting my time and your time ‘cos I seem to be writing the same thing. But other than that I found it easy, it was easy to understand, questions were, you know, on a level that I could understand them and what you wanted from me, I understood so yeah, I can’t say I... there was anything, I just felt I repeated myself.
Interviewer: Yeah, but this is okay you know, because if there is, I’m sure if there were any changes you’ve written them down isn’t it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So it’s probably because it’s daily routine and daily routine is kind of by nature repetitive.
Participant: Yeah [laughs].
Interviewer: So yeah, we did expect that this will happen but also, you know, we wanted to capture that kind of routine, plus because that would be also differences in everybody else’s routine, you know, slightly different, so this is what we were after basically but yeah there’s a routine is routine [laughs], that’s true. Yeah, did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: No, no, it didn’t. What I was quite surprised about it was a different kind of week as I said, but actually I am quite conscious of different things that I may not have been about before, so like the fact that I do turn the electric off when I’ve finished boiling the kettle and microwave and all things like that, it is quite a good way to live, and I probably didn’t appreciate that before ‘cos even though it’s only little things, them little things can help the environment.
Interviewer: Okay, so there is like a sense of doing something?
Participant: Yeah, yeah. And I didn’t look at the bigger picture of that I think before.
Interviewer: Right, is there anything else that you wanted to add to the diary?
Participant: No, I think... yeah, I think that was it really, as I said I just felt sometimes I was repetitive and but as I said on the other hand, the fact that certain things I do was in my daily routine and it’s a second nature it’s done, it’s you know, contributing to a bigger picture.
Interviewer: Maybe then we could move onto the next thing and I wanted to ask you about your shopping routines, so if you could maybe describe us your typical food shopping trip, how is it like?
Participant: Well normally I would just tend to do two shops, like a bigger shop on like a Sunday or a Monday, mine’s generally a Monday and then I would do another shop in a weekend, like just for some extra bits, but obviously because it was a different kind of week I don’t think that was reflected in my bills in what I would normally do. You know, I used a lot of things up at home ‘cos well I don’t want to go out shopping because I’ve got bits and pieces in the house that I can use when I was saving the money to go for the party that I was having, so I just kind of like made do and mend type thing, kind of what I’ve got here I used up instead of doing the extra trips to the shops that I possibly would have done as a normal shop if you see what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And how many times a week or a month do you usually go to buy food, you said probably a week?
Participant: I probably go twice a week.
Interviewer: Twice a week, yeah, is that the main kind of shop twice a week or how does it look like, or you do...
Participant: I tend to do a main shop on a Monday, and then I would do extras for the weekend with the children being home and like being around more, so it’s kind of like I kind of think about what meals I’m going to do in the week and get all that for the weekend, like throughout the week on the Monday and then I’ll get the extra bits on a Friday ready for extras over the weekend.
Interviewer: I see, yeah. And what kind of stores do you use to buy food?
Participant: I will go to Asda, that is my main shopping place I will go to, Lidl, and B&M, they’re like sell a bit of everything, you name it they sell it, food and toys and bedding and clothing, just because sometimes food can be cheaper in there but I do tend to watch the prices because sometimes in Asda, like my daughter likes J2Os so sometimes they can be on offer in Asda for £2 so I’ll buy them in my normal shop, but at the moment they’re back up to £3.68 so actually they’re cheaper in B&M, so I would pop into B&M, you know, on my travels and pick them up in there, but yeah I am quite price conscious of certain things like that.
Interviewer: Sure, and did you mention that Asda, you use Asda for your main shop?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And then what kind of shops do you use for the top-up, is that...?
Participant: That would be Asda again.
Interviewer: And Lidl and the other shop, B&M that you mentioned, is that just an occasional visit?
Participant: Yeah, if I’m thinking oh I’ll do something, or I might drop in on my way to work, I think, oh no I haven’t got that, I forgot that, ‘cos I don’t very often do a shopping list so if I think, oh no, I’ve forgot something, it’s easy for me to drop into Lidl on my way home from work, so I’ll pick anything up that I need or if I’ve forgotten anything from there normally.
Interviewer: Yeah. And I mean why is Asda for you kind of the shop that you’ve selected as probably the most frequent...
Participant: It is my closest one, or one of my closest ones because where I am in Bedminster we have got lots of supermarkets, there is a Sainsbury’s down the road, there is Tesco’s a little bit further out, but I find Asda on price and it is, I would class it as my local shop, so yeah, mainly price really because on a lot of things there could be a huge difference between Tesco’s and Sainsbury’s, definitely.
Interviewer: And how do you usually plan your food shopping?
Participant: I usually think about what meals I’m going to cook through the week and then I will go out and buy what food is needed, so it’s like this week I’ve got like sausage casserole, I bought a pasta bake, then I’ve got some mince already in the freezer and my sausages I’ve already got so I’ve just picked up the veg to supplement that ‘cos I’ve already got things in the freezer that have been previously bought, ‘cos I tend to buy some bigger items and then freeze it down, if I buy the bigger mince I’ll cut it in half, like halve it, and use that one that week and I’ll put one in the freezer and like with chicken fillets, I buy like four or six and then what I don’t use I put in the freezer and then over a couple of weeks I’ve then got the extra meal from the ones that I froze, then I’m, you know, some weeks it’s cheaper than others because I will use things like the freezer.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is important to you when you choose food and what is less important?
Participant: I need it to be filling, I like it to be of a healthy... as much as possible, to a degree, and price as well, I mean I can’t afford to go and buy free range and natural and all of that because my budget doesn’t allow that, but I like the get the best what I can for my money, you know, I’m not constantly, oh it’s chips every night, it was fish yesterday, sausage casserole with vegetables today, you know, and try to have a healthy diet, but filling, you know, then you can treat yourself, you know, on a weekend or...
Interviewer: And how do you... well you kind of mentioned that you try to get the best for the money, so what kind of things would be, what kind of criteria do you...?
Participant: With the meat it is like I look at the better cuts with longer dates on, although obviously mince I do use because it is a cheaper cut of meat and it goes further. And yeah, it’s all within budget as well, you know, what I can afford, is that going to last, is that going to do an extra few meals and I look for the deals that they’ve got on, so like in Asda they do three items for £10, so for that £10 you can get, you know, a chicken, a joint of pork and something else for the £10, so but yeah.
Interviewer: Sure. And what is less important to you when buying food or choosing food?
Participant: I don't know, it’s kind of just what I’ve got planned, I can’t say... obviously I do buy eggs that are not from battery hens, I do try to buy free range eggs, but other than that, that is probably all I do do.
Interviewer: And what is the reason for buying free range?
Participant: Just ‘cos it’s mean to lock them up.
Interviewer: Say it again please?
Participant: It’s mean for chickens to be locked up how they are. And there isn’t a great deal of difference in the price, so I do now buy free range eggs.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to store?
Participant: I drive, I drive everywhere, as much as I want to save the planet by turning off switches I do like my car.
Interviewer: And do you go food shopping on your own or with other people?
Participant: No, I go on my own, ‘cos I tend to do it when the children are at school ‘cos I only work part-time, I can call in on an afternoon when it’s a little bit quieter and then it’s all done ready before the children are home and stuff.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how much does it happen to you to have some food waste, you know, in terms of something that you haven’t used, of what you bought?
Participant: Yeah, that is something I’ve found that has increased dramatically, ‘cos about a year ago, just over me and my husband split up and I find I buy things and because the children come between us I find I’ve got a lot of food waste ‘cos I think, oh I’ll pick that up and then they’ll be a few days at their dads and then it’s not used, which is why I buy, when I buy things I do try to buy things that can be frozen so I’ll buy a bigger pack of chicken fillets and then I can freeze them if the children aren’t here for tea if you see what I mean, so it’s not being wasted, but it is a lot of the fresh stuff like the salad things that is wasted.
Interviewer: Yeah. And yeah, is there anything else that you wanted to add maybe to the shopping routine, before we move on?
Participant: No, I always take my reusable bags, just because I find that I can get a lot more in there and I live in a flat and I’ve got to go up one flight of stairs and I’m not dragging carrier bags left right and centre, it’s only like two or three bags that I’ve then got to carry up, and obviously that’s better for the environment, you just get a lot more in there, because I do it on my own it’s easier, it’s more of a convenience.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. We’ll actually move to the bags just now [both laugh] I’ll ask you a few more questions about this.
Participant: That’s alright.
Interviewer: And maybe the first one is slightly unusual, is if you could tell me maybe five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: They are convenient, too convenient, easy to pick up, flying around like you wouldn’t believe as in rubbish, just see them all the time, they’re useful ‘cos I do separate my recycling with them, ‘cos then it makes it easier for my bin men ‘cos we haven’t got separate compartments in our bins for the recycling, so actually to make their job easier I do separate it. And I’ve got a bit of a fetish, I do keep carrier bags [laughs], because they’re useful to have.
Interviewer: And do you remember the first point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: The story of the plastic bag [both laugh].
Participant: My mum was a single parent and I remember, ‘cos they used to be a lot thicker back in the day [laughs], than they are now, and I remember having to help her carry them back home, like all the shopping ‘cos I was one of four with only my mum and we all had to pitch in and she didn’t have a car and we all had to carry the bags in and I remember it cutting into my hands [laughs]. Really like not very nice to carry ‘cos it just all marked our hands and that ‘cos there was so much stuff in there.
Interviewer: Yeah, and this, you know, you’ve never seen the point when supermarkets didn’t have bags yet?
Participant: No. They’ve just always been there haven’t they, they’ve just... just... but in Lidl and Aldi they’re not, you’ve got to buy them, so actually what I tend to do is if I’m in Lidl or Aldi I do make sure I've got a bag on me, or I’ll just carry it out to the car. But then I don’t do a big shop, nine times out of ten I don’t do my big shop in Lidl or Aldi, I am just going in and picking up things, but it probably doesn’t... it is better I would imagine.
Interviewer: And sorry just coming back a little bit to Lidl and Aldi again, why do you like to go there occasionally, you said that it was on your way to work or home from work?
Participant: Yeah, it’s convenient, it’s on my way home from work and some of their food is good quality, and it can be cheaper if you’re willing not for a brand, then they are cheaper, a hell of a lot cheaper.
Interviewer: Okay, great. So coming back now, again coming backwards and forwards, so basically, yeah, about your bag use so you said that you tried to bring your own bags, but also occasionally take, you know, plastic bags in supermarkets.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So could you tell when you go to do your main shop to Asda, what do you usually do?
Participant: When I do my main shop and I know I’m going shopping I take three, no is it two or three, two of like the laminated type ones, the big ones, I take some of those, I take two of those and then I’ve got the bag for life so the carrier bag ones, I tend to take two or three of those just in case it won’t go in my two like laminated bags. And I tend to put like meat in those ones, so then it’s not, there’s no cross-contamination type thing.
Interviewer: In the single use ones, those that are for free?
Participant: No, in my bag for life ones.
Interviewer: The plastic bags for life, sure yeah. So you have those plastic bags for life as well.
Participant: I use those types.
Interviewer: And could you just say maybe a couple of words of why you prefer these, using these bags that, you know, you’re currently using?
Participant: They’re thicker, they’re stronger, they do last a long time and with the laminated ones, as I said you can get so much more in them and for my use of up and down the stairs so much easier just to carry one big bag at a time, than ten little ones.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And you also mentioned that sometimes it happens to you to take the single use bags, the free ones?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And when does this happen?
Participant: When I do a spur of the moment, if I think, oh no, and I’ve got to pick up a few things and I haven’t got a bag in the car, then I will take a single use one.
Interviewer: Sure, and how often does it happen to you to take those bags and how many do you generally take?
Participant: Not very often because as I said nine times out of ten I do tend to plan when I’m going to do my shopping, I’d say once... oh god, not even one a week, so I want to say one in a fortnight or two in a fortnight, it’s not very often at all but because I do tend to plan I barely take a bag now anyway, but if you said one a week probably not even that many, one every two weeks, I want to say.
Interviewer: And when precisely you said that this happens when you do little top-ups shops you said you normally try and remember to bring your bag with you for those as well.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So why would you say you prefer to bring your own in those occasions, not when you carry a big shop?
Participant: Just because it’s better you know, and it’s just in my routine, if I know I’m going to go to the shops I’ll grab my bags.
Interviewer: And if it’s a top-up shop what kind of bag do you bring with you, is it again the big ones or...?
Participant: Yeah, ‘cos they’re all out there ready to grab I just take them and then they’re in my car and then I think, right, I’m not getting that much so I might just take one of the laminated ones and one of the bag for life ones.
Interviewer: And do you store them in your car or do you store them within the home?
Participant: They’re stored in the kitchen.
Interviewer: Yeah, somewhere in the cupboard or something like that?
Participant: Yeah, they’re under the breakfast bar.
Interviewer: And why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well because they guarantee them, apparently, and if it breaks then they’ll replace it for free, I think, that’s what some supermarkets do anyway, or that’s my impression that I've forgotten.
Interviewer: Have you tried replacing them yet?
Participant: No, I’ve never had to.
Interviewer: And do you think the use that people make of bags for life matches its name?
Participant: No, because they will get thrown, some people do, I use mine ‘cos they are all in with my bags, but some people do just throw them away. So perhaps some people’s attitudes aren’t as much as it’s a bag for life.
Interviewer: And what kind of ideas or what made you choose, you know, trying these bags for life for yourself?
Participant: Because they are bigger and stronger than single plastic use ones. So if I’ve gone shopping and I haven’t had my bags, but I’ve had mine ages, if I’ve done a big shop or I bought particularly heavy things, then they’re better for that use, ‘cos they are bigger and they’re stronger.
Interviewer: And compared to the single use ones, what are their, you know, advantages in this situation, like putting meat in the single use ones?
Participant: Personally if I had to use a bag for me those single use ones are good but I will keep all my meat separate so they will go in a bag, all dependant on, you know, I think they’re too good of a bag to put your meat in, but then you should take your bags and have separate bags for your shopping when you go.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, yeah. And in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think they should because people, I’ve done it, I’ve forgot my bags and you can... it is a service that is provided by the shop because you’re spending money in there and things like that, and is it just with shopping or with clothes as well?
Interviewer: Well let’s maybe... we can speak about those situations if you prefer like separately.
Participant: With food shopping I think you should really remember your bags because they’ve made it so easy now to buy the bags, and to make sure that it’s available for you, and they are good strong sturdy bags, you should use them. But when you go clothes shopping and stuff I wouldn’t remember to take a bag because sometimes I might just think, oh I’m just going for a browse and then end up buying something, I think actually when you’re spending quite a bit of money and clothes and stuff, a bag should be provided.
Interviewer: I see, yeah.
Participant: Because actually it’s brand new clothes, it should be going into a clean environment, if you see what... it should go into a clean bag to keep the item as clean as possible.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and what would happen if the bags, the plastic bags completely disappeared from stores?
Participant: Well I’d feel a bit lost, I think it would be quite detrimental.
Interviewer: And why would you...?
Participant: Because people wouldn’t be able to get their shopping home, because I’ve forgot bags, there’s probably thousands and millions of people that have gone shopping and forgot a bag and I just think less like back in the old days, they had the boxes on the end where you can stack it, then it’s not going to work because you will always find people, whether they’ve got to pay for them or not, they will always have a use I think.
Interviewer: And do you think that people could get it up to bringing their bags all the time with them?
Participant: I think probably the majority of people do bring their own bags from what I’ve seen looking around in the shops, lots of people do go with their own bags, but it’s making it part of people’s routine isn’t it, like for me it’s part of my routine to grab my bags from the kitchen, and for others they keep them in their car or whatever, but there’s also a percentage of people that it’s not become second nature yet for them.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And do you... you mentioned that you get some reuse from the, you know, the very thin single use bags, that are free, so you mentioned that you use them for recycling a little bit and is there anything else that you use them for or that’s it basically?
Participant: That’s it really, I use them to sort, to separate my recycling, and if my children are taking their cooking stuff to school, obviously I put it in a plastic container but then I put it in a carrier bag, like wrapped around so it doesn’t ruin their school stuff, if anything was to leak out of the plastic container that’s contained within another plastic bag if you see what I mean, and my son’s football boots, that’s another thing that I use a plastic carrier bag for, but I don’t use the same carrier bag [laughs]. So yeah I haven’t got no like paper bins, what you’d call to use as that, but I know my sister does use carrier bags in her paper bins, her little bins and that around her house. But yeah, it’s, yeah, those are the only things that I would.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And do you know what plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Is it... oh I’m trying to think, I think Lidl or Aldi charge 3p or 5p, something like that, but I have noticed in shops now, ‘cos I went to Next last week and they’ve got a notice up saying that as of 1st of October or 5th of October they will now be charging 5p for carrier bags, and I’ve noticed, that was in Next I noticed that, that’s what they... oh something else I use plastic bags for, ‘cos I start early with my Christmas shopping, I put them all in carrier bags and then I keep it all separate. So that might be shops like Debenhams, Next or wherever, and as well as like Asda, but yeah just to keep everyone’s presents separate.
Interviewer: Yeah, just basically what happens is it’s just like a little notice, after we’ll be speaking about it, it will be a national charge, so in the whole of the country, it already exists in Wales and in Scotland, Wales was first and Scotland and Ireland and then England, the last part of the UK that goes to have this national charge of 5p for single use bags, obviously bags for life they’ve always been paid, this one is going to become as well, yeah, so it’s going to be not only particular shops but almost everywhere and we’ll come back also to some exceptions just in a minute, so what do you think about this 5p plastic bag charge on single use bags?
Participant: I think it’s a good thing if it’s going to go towards environmental issues, I don’t think it should be used as another way for companies making profit.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you find the introduction of this charge surprising at all or not?
Participant: No, they want to tax everything now don’t they [laughs], it just seems another way to get, you know, I know they are environmentally and, and as I said I haven’t got a problem, it’s dear, and I think people will find it quite hard, you know, if that’s what they’re going to be charging for some people, if they’re doing a normal shop and they’ve got ten bags, that’s another 50p which don’t sound a lot but to some people that could be their milk, part of their milk for the week but something needs to be done and maybe they will get into the habit of taking their own bags.
Interviewer: And what do you think is good about plastic bag charge if anything?
Participant: Hopefully it will change people’s opinions and they will take their own bags so that there is less plastic being created and less rubbish like the bags flying around, within the environment and, you know, yeah.
Interviewer: And what is possibly not as good, we mentioned a couple of things, maybe anything else?
Participant: Yeah, the charge can be hurting some families, and actually it’d be quite strange not to have them so readily available.
Interviewer: Well they will be available.
Participant: But you’d be charging, yeah, I think people will think more about, oh I just stick two or three things in there, when actually if they filled the bag properly or packed it properly they’d get a lot more so less would need to be used.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I don’t know, I haven’t looked into it to see where it is, I mean is the money going to environmental issues, because obviously companies have been buying these bags for years and years and years so they’ve taken that cost into their running cost, where my question would be where does the charge go, if they’re going to sell a million bags at 5p a go, where’s all that money going to, is it going back into the shops, are they being taxed heavily now or where does that money go, is it just another money making scheme for the company, is it going towards environmental issues, that’s where I want to know where it was going.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and have you tried to find out yet or not really?
Participant: No, I haven’t yet, no.
Interviewer: Do you think you will?
Participant: Yeah, I will actually.
Interviewer: And do you think that the introduction of the 5p charge will affect you personally or not?
Participant: Not overly, no.
Interviewer: So when you say not overly then just a little bit?
Participant: Yeah, I might be a bit, oh god I’ve got to pay another 5p for a carrier bag, but I don’t very often... and that’s actually how am I going to sort my recycling now, those poor dustbin men are going to be sorting my rubbish aren’t they [laughs]? Perhaps council needs to give us separate boxes.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, so basically you won’t need those at all?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you think well before the council has sorted these facilities out, do you think it will affect your shopping bag use, you know in the next few weeks or not?
Participant: No, I don't think it will, no.
Interviewer: And can I detect your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No. Routine and I’ve...
Interviewer: So basically would you just continue taking those couple of bags a fortnight or something like that, or would you avoid?
Participant: I would avoid if I could, and I would possibly think about putting a couple of bags for life in my car, like in my glove box, but if I am out somewhere and I bought something and I haven’t got a bag then I’ve got to pay, yeah.
Interviewer: And how many of these plastic bags do you currently have at home, the single use ones and also maybe bags for life?
Participant: My bags for life and those laminated ones, I’ve got three big ones of the laminated ones and I’ve probably got about six bags for life. Carrier bags, I’ve got one of those IKEA little things, it’s not full up, that’s about half full, full of the single use ones.
Interviewer: So one of the IKEA bags, I see. And bags for life, when they break or when they are no longer useable, what do you normally do with them, if that happened already to you?
Participant: It hasn’t happened, all my bags are okay.
Interviewer: And when it happens will you go to try and exchange or?
Participant: Yeah, I would, especially if they want to charge me now, yeah, I would go and say, “I’ve stuck by what’s been imposed, so bag for life, my bag’s died, I need another one.”
Interviewer: Yeah, I mean normally this is how it should be applied so you shouldn’t be worried about this, yeah, when people come to exchange they exchange normally, yeah, the bags for life, I’m not sure about Lidl, I’ve no idea but...
Participant: No, I don’t know [laughs].
Interviewer: ...the other ones should be, yeah, great. And do you think that the introduction of the plastic bag charge, you know, will make you a more environmentally friendly person at all or not?
Participant: No, I can’t see anything changing, because I do try to do things that is a little bit, I may turn off lights but as I say I still get in my car and drive everywhere.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any changes in the sort of, not in yourself, but in other people’s behaviours and what they’re doing and also in the environment, anything you can think of, any other outer changes after the introduction of the charge?
Participant: I think more people will think twice now and as I said pack more carefully, put more things in the bags, and take less of them. And possibly put it into their routine of taking the bag for life, with like the as their sort of bags like.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And do you think that bag reuse is currently encouraged in the UK or in England in particular?
Participant: I want to say it probably is encouraged but not to the extent that it could have been, I mean they always got the bag for life down by the tills, you know, but I think those laminated ones, the thicker ones, I think they could be pushed a little bit more because actually you can fit so much more in them, even than the bag for life like the thicker ones, because they’re that much bigger and longer you can really get so much more in there so there is less, less bags if you see what I mean, just overall.
Interviewer: And another thing I wanted to ask you about, you answered partly to this question but there are a couple of other things, when the 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of shops and also some types of bags to which the charge will not apply, the 5p charge, so you’ve mentioned clothing shops, your opinion on that, so I’ve kind of understood it, but also there will be hot food takeaways that will not charge 5p, and those medium to small retailers and corner shops which will be exempt from it.
Participant: See my sister her shop does charge her for bags.
Interviewer: Right, some of them do in fact, yeah, that’s right, but you know, this is how it’s going to be applied in England and it’s not the case actually in Scotland and Wales where the charge is like a blanket policy, that’s all the shops.
Participant: I think that’s a big unfair ‘cos actually if you’re going to bring something in it should be across everything really, I didn’t even think about hot food. So like say if you went to the Chinese chip shop and they put it in a little carrier bag you won’t be charged for that, no?
Interviewer: Not in England, but you are supposed to be charged, sometimes it’s not applied by people’s, you know, initiative let’s say [laughs]...
Participant: I didn’t even think about that [laughs], but I think if it’s in shops, like the Spar’s and all things like that, I think if you’re going to charge in Asda then you should be charging in there because actually there’s probably a higher usage of that, people taking the single use bags, than there is in Asda, or major supermarket.
Interviewer: And why do you think so?
Participant: Because people are popping in, and oh just grab this, just grab that, so actually they would probably make more money charging those sort of places than they do Asda because people are planning, like I plan, and you grab your stuff, whereas if you think oh no I’ve got to pop along the shop, I’ve forgot bread or milk, I’m really low and I’ve got people here, it’s, I think if you’re going to do it across you should do it across the board.
Interviewer: Right, yeah, and how about clothing shops, clothing and shoes?
Participant: See I don’t think they should charge for the clothes, I said that before, I think actually you’re buying their product, you could be spending £95 on a dress, actually they should give you a bag to put it in, that’s my opinion.
Interviewer: And another exemption is going to be the very little bags that you get for free in supermarkets...
Participant: Yeah, Marks & Spencer’s do them don’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah, and also...
Participant: Marks & Spencer’s they charge you if you have a normal single use bag but the little ones, like the tiny little ones isn’t it, I want to say like A3, A5 sort of size isn’t it, it’s not very big, they don’t charge for that.
Interviewer: Yeah, and also...
Participant: Again I think if you’re going to charge you should charge no matter what.
Interviewer: And how about those very very tiny ones, the transparent ones that you find in bakery and also fruit and veg sections on the shelves.
Participant: They’ve never got any of them in anyway, no I don’t think you should charge for them ‘cos you are putting ingle, like say I bought five apples, I do tend not to use them, if I’m buying like two or three things I won’t put in one of those little bags, but sometimes if you’re buying quite a few things they should be in a bag, yeah, and you should... I don’t think they should charge for them.
Interviewer: And how about biodegradable bags, because again those will be not charge.
Participant: So like Primark ‘cos they do the paper bags?
Interviewer: Yeah, brown paper and also biodegradable which is sort of starch, which is yeah it gets biodegraded in nature when thrown away.
Participant: No, don’t charge for those because they’ve already tried to do something about it haven’t they and I do use that for my recycling, if I’ve got paper or cardboard I will use one of those bags to put it all in.
Interviewer: And how do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges, for example a charge on fuel duties or for environmental reasons, the prices of fuel would be made slightly higher than they currently are to discourage people from driving too much, how do you think that compares to plastic bag charge and what do you think about that?
Participant: I think if you’re going to do it you’re going to do it regardless of the price to a degree, if you can afford it then you will do it, like I drive, like I drop my daughter to school but my son walks, well people could say well she could walk as well, well or but because I can afford the petrol and the duty on that I do it. Like people with plastic bags, if they’re not bothered by paying that 5p or whatever it’s going to be, unless you make it totally not valuable, like not within budget, will it ever affect anything.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and what do you think about another charge on for instance... it doesn’t exist really in the country yet but it exists on the continent, some countries, where people when they buy plastic bottles or certain things in plastic packaging, thick plastic packaging, when they buy these things they put a small deposit in, a few pence, or I think I’ve heard actually it’s quite a substantial amount [laughs], something like 30 euro cents which is probably something like 20p per packaging, when they bring it back to the outlet they get the deposit back, what do you think about that?
Participant: I don’t know if I like that idea because I recycle mine anyway, so like say if my chicken has come in like the plastic tray with the film lid, I recycle that plastic tray, so if I’m recycling it I should need to take it back and I shouldn’t be charged, I can see how it works, how actually no you’re... you’re bringing it back so you’re going to refill it type thing, but to make it work it needs to be part of a routine and I routinely put mine out and a lot of people do their recycling now. And actually there’s some plastic things that bin men don’t take, it’s like I bought a blind and that’s in a long plastic square tubing, but they wouldn’t take that, now I’ve put that in my recycling bin ‘cos it’s a thick plastic that I thought could be recycled, so maybe it’s about us being educated or changing some of the packaging to where it can be recycled, or something like that, because I genuinely thought it could be recycled so I didn’t put it in my waste bin, I put it out for recycling, but they had left it, and there are certain trays that they leave as well, like what your meat comes in, there’s certain trays that they won’t take them either.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and how about the bottles which, you know, some people actually don’t recycling, especially when they grab a little coke bottle on the street and a lot of those go to landfill currently, what if those were, you know, with a deposit applied to those?
Participant: Again I don’t think it should be because if they offered you it in something else for the same price, say if they’d done a 5ml, a 500ml coke, what you by in the shops for like £1.50, £1.60 if they offered that in a glass bottle for the same price people would recycle it, because they don’t see it as much as rubbish as they do with the plastic. Even though it can all be recycled and I have noticed, actually in Bristol a lot of our waste bins now do have general waste and plastic, so within what I’ve seen the city council are trying to make it easier to recycle, those sort of things.
Interviewer: Right, okay.
Participant: By having not just a rubbish bin, like litter for public use, they’re having like a double one and one is general waste and one is plastic, so I think, you know, little things like that can be put into place and a lot more will end up being recycled.
Interviewer: Sure. And what do you think will happen in about maybe ten years’ time as a result of introduction of plastic bag charge if anything?
Participant: I think more people will get into the habit of taking bags, and there will probably be less plastic single use bags about, but I think there will still be a need for them.
Interviewer: And okay, that probably we’re kind of coming to the end very soon, so maybe just a couple of things I wanted to ask you about, you mentioned recycling and, you know, also wanted to ask you about the fact of you living in Bristol and Bristol having been elected I think the European Green Capital or something like that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of, how would I frame it, it’s kind of a unique question really but do you feel that you live in a city which is European Green Capital, and yeah, and what could you say about this?
Participant: I want to say we’ve got lots of areas now which are they’ve added in a lot of cycle lanes, not the cycle... not the cycle is an issue, we’ve got lots of pedestrianised areas, especially like down in the centre of town, the buses they’ve put these showcase bus routes in which is bus lane only and things like this, so they have done a lot to promote travel through the city, that other than a car. I think a lot still needs to be done on that. And as I said with the bins, a lot of the bins around, like especially like Bedminster is like a high street and in town there’s... and I would imagine it would be the same for different high streets, they’ve got the bins where they are separate for the general waste and plastic and you’ve got, but I wouldn’t have said I felt overly green here, I can’t say we’re probably much different to many other cities.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what do you think you would like to see improved in that respect if anything, or you’re just happy with how things are at the moment?
Participant: I think [pause]... I don’t know, I don't think... ‘cos cyclists here around, they take no notice of what the rules of the road are for them, they will cycle on pavements, my niece was knocked over by a cyclist, and actually I think there needs to be more accountability for the cyclist actually because we’ve put in all these... they’ve spent thousands upon thousands of pounds for cycle lanes and bus lanes and things like that, but actually when the lights are red for the bus they cut over to the normal traffic anyway and I think if the council has spent all the money in putting bus lanes and cycle lanes in and actually they should use those lanes and not cut across just because their lights are red, they should wait and they should use their lanes because I as a driver can’t use that bus lane when my light’s red, I’ve got to wait. And the cyclists, they should be more accountable, they should have insurance because too many people, they’ve got all their gear on and they’re cycling and they’re cycling quite fast and actually lots of people are getting injured. I know the cyclists get injured by cars and all things like that, but if they’re going to be cycling and we’ve promoted that as a city, then they should be abiding by the rules.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah.
Participant: Oh I sound awful [both laugh].
Interviewer: No, that’s fine, yeah, no, it’s your opinion so this is what I'm after so don’t worry. And how concerned are you if at all about environmental issues?
Participant: I think recycling is a good thing, I think it should have come in, I don’t know why it was ever stopped from back in my nan’s day, they used to have like a big pig bin what they called years ago and all the food waste was collected, I don’t know how many times a week or whatever, whereas we went completely away from that, going back like through the ‘60s and ‘70s and the ‘80s and all this plastic come in, so my generation have just grown up with plastic and plastic bags, whereas in my nan’s generation they’re thinking, well we’ve done all this, why did they change it, like you know, with the less packaging on the food and things like that, because the only thing that was available to them was their local butcher, their local fruit and veg shop and things like that, whereas we’ve gone through the age, the way things have gone, we are now able to get everything we want from wherever we want, in one shot, and I think that has had a detrimental effect, you know, this convenience, but we all use them, and it is convenient. But as I said it just seems that we’re going back to when what was going on 50 years ago, ‘cos they are realising oh my god we’ve done all this damage to the environment, and there’s no green, or very few green spaces and very few trees and, you know, oh what’s happened with the rainforest and things like that, the amount of damage that’s done and I think we’re just paddling like mad like ducks trying to reverse what we’ve done and I think that’s going to take years, I think that’s going to take forever and a day, you’re never going to get back those rainforests, or the animals that have been killed and extinct from those [laughs].
Interviewer: And what does pro-environmental behaviour mean to you, environmentally friendly behaviour, however you prefer to frame it?
Participant: It means, or what I think it means, or what I can do within my daily life is trying to use less electric, making sure things are turned off, recycle what I can, I should use my car less but I don’t [laughs]. Recycling, trying to use renewable energies, as I said to you when we met, when we first met about actually all these new houses, they can have a solar panel put on, they can have a small wind turbine, just a small one and I think if it’s put into people’s routine or it’s there provided, you’re not necessarily thinking about it, it’s just happened if you see what I mean, they’ve done the plates didn’t they at the Olympics where when people were walking on it it was generating electricity, and, you know, in a school you think how that would reduce the school’s bills with all the pupils walking on it, you know, I think it needs to be put into a life without not really knowing about it for, you know, you can change behaviours, but some of them are, if you just put them in can be really easy because we have got the technology nowadays that it can be put into life quite easily.
Interviewer: So basically there is both the need of provision of structure, etc, regulations, yeah, and also people’s willingness to do that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, and you know compared to other issues in modern society how important is environment in relation to those for yourself, things like social, economic, health questions, you know anything that you can imagine within the modern society, what is the place of the environment in your views?
Participant: I think without it, if we don’t look after our environment it’s going to severely hamper us as humans because without trees we can’t breathe and without energy ‘cos we’ve all got all this new technology and we’re all paying for our electric bills but we need to look at renewables that is going to last and sustain lifestyles that we’ve got. So sustainability I think is, would be mine.
Interviewer: Right, and what makes you think so?
Participant: Because it’s going to run out isn’t it, you look at the mining, I mean years ago everyone relied on coal and actually that mining didn’t last forever, you know, so actually looking at what’s happened in the past to try and look at things for the future, so all this renewable energy, using our weather because we are so, we are so lucky with our weather, we haven’t got extremes but we can harness what we’ve got.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues to be able to act environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: Probably not because I think there’s always new things coming out and new ways, and you should be continuously learning anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what would you say is currently lacking in terms of, you know, what... what I wanted to ask is more like what do you think should be done if anything, you know, in the area of...
Participant: I think every new house should have a mini turbine and a solar panel on because not only are the saving the household money but actually you’re saving the environment, so if every house had one solar panel on, at least if that just produced 40% of what that house used, you’d put that over a housing estate of 500 houses, that’s saving a lot of energy, and that’s saving a lot being pulled away from the earth if you see what I mean?
Interviewer: Absolutely, yeah. And in terms of you know communication on environmental issues, skills, how would that look, skills transference, whatever, you know, education, around environmental things, how would you...
Participant: I don’t think it’s discussed enough in school, I think probably more education needs to be done with the children, I mean I was lucky, both my children were on the green committee in school and I think they do things in school to help them learn, but perhaps we could do more, and I know when my children went to primary school too they’ve had a new building and they put loads and loads of solar panels on and where my son goes to boys’ brigade again they’ve had a new building and they’ve put loads of solar panels on the church hall and he’s aware but do they know why because actually things are going to run out and it could affect them more so than me.
Interviewer: And for adults, should there be any communication, any kind of, you know, information, more information for people or not?
Participant: I think there should be, yeah, I think sometimes with the electric bill, actually can they say that X amounts have come from renewable energies, X amounts have come from like the nuclear power and things like that, because when I seen this morning that oh yeah we’ve agreed this deal with China for Hinkley Point, I’m thinking, whoa, is that really something we want to be doing, it’s not as if China has had the best record with nuclear power stations, you know, and I think oh, we should be looking at different ways, as I said using our own wind farms and solar panels and things like that.
Interviewer: And just the last question, are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment or would you like to improve anything in this or not?
Participant: I would like to drive less, but it’s the convenience thing, I know I should drive less, I know I should, because obviously that is a big big thing, but I do only have a small car and that’s how I try to justify it to myself, but driving less would be a big thing for me.
Interviewer: Yeah. And do you feel that the provision of public transport is good and embraced, also would that be...
Participant: Not where I work, because I work out in North Somerset, it’s only about a ten minute car ride but there isn’t a direct bus that takes me there and that’s where I think these things could be improved, actually people do work, I mean I’ve got to be in work by nine o’clock but if I want to get a bus I’ve probably got to go, a lot of our bus journeys, if you want to go from one side of town to the other it’s two buses a lot of the time, so it’s like my son done work experience and he done it at a garage, at a friends and that was over at Staple Hill so to get from Bedminster to Staple Hill which is the opposite side of town, you go through town, he would have had to have got two buses and for him to get to where he needed to be he would have had to have been up really early, like I want to say probably he would have been leaving the house two hours before he needed to start work, and I think that sort of length of time is not acceptable.
Interviewer: Sure.
Participant: For anyone, you know, my friends, they’re always going on, “The bus is late, this hasn’t turned up,” and I think we do need to improve public transport.
Interviewer: Sure, okay, thank you very much Sarah, really really helpful and really interesting interview. Is there anything that you would like to add or to emphasise before we finish?
Participant: No, I think that’s it, I’ve enjoyed doing the study, I’ve haven’t found it intrusive or nothing, it’s been enjoyable.
Interviewer: Great, thank you very much.