Interviewer: Ok, well thank you very much for taking part in the Diary Study.
Participant: That’s ok.
Interviewer: So we just have an hour to speak about your experiences of the Diary Study, and then just to discuss in detail some questions that we touched upon already.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, just to clarify your points of view. So please remember there are no right or wrong answers, we just want to know about your daily routine and your honest points of view.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: So do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: None, I mean it was very repetitive, I mean I think the study could have been a little bit different, maybe the questions could have been changed maybe every two or three days, because I found myself answering the same sort of questions all the time, what did you recycle? I did find it was quite strange when I analysed my shopping habits, how random I was at shopping, I didn’t realise how random I was at shopping, I’m being honest with you.
Interviewer: Ok, so how did you found the diary filling in experience overall?
Participant: Ok, ok to be honest.
Interviewer: Was it quite easy?
Participant: It was really easy, yeah, it was really easy. I mean some of the questions I thought, oh, do you really need to know that, whether I’ve bought ink cartridges, or? I mean, because you wouldn’t buy ink cartridges on a day to day basis anyway, but other than that, no, it was just, it was fine, it was really fine.
Interviewer: Ok, please could you describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: My food shopping?
Interviewer: Trip, so how often, where you go?
Participant: Well, this is, this is, to be honest, the diary highlighted how bad I was at buying food. I would buy, like my normal food shop would be on a Saturday, but to be honest it was quite… I couldn’t get over how much money I was spending on a day to day basis picking up other things, whereas normally I would write a list and stick to the list, I was deviating and thinking, oh, I don’t want that today, I’ll have something else. So I would just go in the shop for bread rolls, whereas normally I would have bought a week’s shop, it was different, definitely different.
Interviewer: Ok, so how many times a week do you think you were going food shopping?
Participant: Truthfully? It was four times, even if it was things like bread rolls, the main staples I’d buy, toilet roll, shampoo and conditioner, bread, but I would run out of things and I would always replenish. Or like I do a lot of, you know, entertaining, so of course, entertaining, I would always ort of buy extra things because other people would come over. So yes, it was random and I think, I didn’t realise how much I spent on food shopping, so I think I am going to try and wrap it in a little bit, roll it in a bit.
Interviewer: So sort of one big shop and three…
Participant: Well yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, and what kind of, what shops did you go to?
Participant: Tesco’s and Asda for my main shop, but randomly, because Lidl’s was very close I used Aldi’s and Lidl’s, and sometimes Home Bargains, but usually Aldi’s because it’s close, within walking distance of my shop, the walking distance of my work. Other than that it would be Lidl’s because that would become, you know, because they’ve got a fresh bakery.
Interviewer: Hm, oh yeah, the Lidl bakery, yeah.
Participant: Oh it’s bread, I’m a bigger for bread.
Interviewer: Yeah, so what sort of size are these shops, is it all the quite big ones?
Participant: Asda’s a supermarket in Morriston, Lidl’s, again, quite big, they provide you with all the staples, and Aldi’s the same, quite large.
Interviewer: Ok, and how do you plan your food shopping? Do you take a list with you?
Participant: Yes, on a Saturday I always take a list, but on midweek it’s usually I sit at my desk, right, what are we going to have for tea? I don’t want this, I want that, I’ll always buy day to day fresh then, but I don’t take a list day to day.
Interviewer: Oh, and what is kind of important to you when you’re choosing what food to buy, and what’s less important?
Participant: Right, because I work full-time, I’m mortgage free, money doesn’t bother me, I buy what I want, so I never really think, oh I can’t afford that. Quality, definitely, obviously freshness, and variety, I like variety. I don’t like just basic potatoes every day, I like rice, I like couscous, I like all different things, I like variety, so I think I’m at an age where I like to cook, so it’s variety, certainly not the price, and it’s the freshness. And I suppose I also shop looking wise, you know, if something looks nice, if there’s a cake on the shelf and it looks nice, it’s mine, you know, it’s mine.
Interviewer: Ok, and how do you normally travel to the, to the different shops?
Participant: I go in the car unless I go to Aldi, it’s only like up the road from me, I walk it, like five minutes in my half hour break.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Always, always, well, sometimes on a Saturday if my partner’s down, he’ll come down with me, but it’s sort of, yeah, it’s usually me.
Interviewer: Ok, and how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: Well, not a lot, I’m being honest. It, I’ve usually only got like at least half of the waste bin full, but not that much because as I say, I will try and recycle, and whatever we have in the day or in the evening, we usually have for dinner. I’ll try and make something that I can have for dinner as well the day after, see.
Interviewer: Ok, could you tell me some words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: I hate buying them, I hate it, rip off [laughs], rip off, I shouldn’t have to pay for them because I’m, you know, like sometimes I’ll spend £70, £80 there, why should I end up buying bags for that? I, and of course it’s been in Wales for a long, long time now hasn’t it?
Interviewer: Hm, yeah.
Participant: I’m just annoyed with it to be honest. I shouldn’t be because obviously they’re not biodegradable and they’re not good for the environment, but I, you know, it does annoy me.
Interviewer: Ok, do you remember in your life, sort of the first time you came across supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, could you tell me a little bit about it?
Participant: When I… can you repeat that?
Interviewer: So when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: Just tell me a little bit about it.
Participant: I, I, what do you mean? Well, I’m 50, I came across supermarket bags when I was quite young, so I can’t really remember that much. I mean I can remember my gran always, well, there weren’t any when I was quite young, it was all string bags and people would have like paper bags, but other than that, no. I can’t remember the changeover to be honest with you.
Interviewer: Ok, that’s great, thank you, and what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping in?
Participant: Always, usually the supermarket’s own bags, or the bags for life, usually I’ve always got them in the boot of the car.
Interviewer: Oh ok, so you bring your own basically?
Participant: Yeah, always.
Interviewer: Ok, and is that something you do automatically without thinking?
Participant: Yeah, only because, you know, I just don’t want a load of bags, you know. I’ve usually got like five or six in my boot and I just sort of use them. It’s almost a routine now, I park my car, get the bags, put them outside the trolley and I just use them all the time, and of course, with the bags for life, if you, you know, if one breaks, you get another one.
Interviewer: Ok, and is that the same for your big shops on the…?
Participant: My big shop, yeah.
Interviewer: And the little shops as well?
Participant: Usually, well, the little shops, I’m quite manic, I’ll go and get what I want and come out. I usually end up juggling them, come outside the shop, you know, outside the store.
Interviewer: Oh what, with no bag?
Participant: Yeah, never, very rare I get a bag because it’s just I do a little shop, maybe two or three items.
Interviewer: Ok, so you just carry it in your hands?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because obviously with a bag for life you can always have them replenished. So you know, if one breaks, all you’ve got to do, the shop will sort of replenish it for you.
Interviewer: Oh what, free of charge is that?
Participant: Yeah, free of charge, so if you take the bag for life in and there’s a hole in it, they’ll give you another one.
Interviewer: Oh, I didn’t actually know that.
Participant: Didn’t you know that? Yeah, that’s why they call them bag for life.
Interviewer: Oh ok.
Participant: See? Oh, you’ve learnt something now.
Interviewer: Yeah, so why do you buy bags for life rather than other bags?
Participant: They’re stronger, I mean like a normal bag is like 5p, a bag for life’s 10, it’s double the strength, it holds more, it looks a little bit better. Again, as I say, you can take them back to have them replenished.
Interviewer: Ok, is there anything about bags for life that aren’t so great?
Participant: No, nothing really, no [laughs].
Interviewer: So you mentioned that you keep them in the boot of your car, do you store any kind of bags at home as well?
Participant: No, saying that, my partner did bring a bag and I had to put it in the, in the cupboard. I’m giving him daggers now because I’ve got another bag in my cupboard, because he’s the same, he recycles as well.
Interviewer: Hm, so if bags sort of completely disappeared from shops, how would you find that?
Participant: I’d be fine because I’ve got bags, I’ve got my store bags, I wouldn’t think twice about paying, you know, like 50, 60p for a nice bag or whatever, and just replenish them, because you need a bag for shopping. I’m almost used to sort of paying for bags now.
Interviewer: Ok, so you’ve mentioned that you reuse your bags for shopping.
Participant: Always, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse them for anything else, like as bin liners or?
Participant: No, no, I always, the thing is, I don’t need to, I have one bin that I’ve got a black bag in, and that’s usually, every two weeks I fill one black bag, everything else is recycled, everything, so I don’t need to.
Interviewer: Ok, and how many plastic bags do you currently have at home? Is it just the one from your partner?
Participant: I’ve got one roll of, oh yeah, the carrier bags, I’ve got one in my cupboard that will more than likely go into my car tomorrow.
Interviewer: [Laughs] Just the one?
Participant: Just the one.
Interviewer: Ok, so you know what the plastic bag charge is then, obviously being in Wales?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you remember what context you heard about it in for the first time?
Participant: I think it was on the news, I think it was on the news, and I think it was in the papers. So on the news I actually saw it first.
Interviewer: Hm, and do you find the introduction of the charge surprising?
Participant: I found it surprising, but when you actually sit back and think, you know, it’s going to good causes, so no, I really didn’t mind at all.
Interviewer: Ok, so what do you think’s good about the charge versus something that…?
Participant: Well I think, I think it makes people realise how many bags, you know, if they use them, and waste them, will actually go into landfill, so it has obviously made people more environmentally sort of aware.
Interviewer: And is there anything not very good about the charge?
Participant: No, not at all, because a charity is actually sort of benefiting. I certainly wouldn’t mind paying 5p for a carrier bag.
Interviewer: Ok, so did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: Do you know where you heard about that?
Participant: On the news, about bloody time too.
Interviewer: [Laughs] Do you know roughly when you heard about it?
Participant: I didn’t know, well, I knew it was this year, but I don’t know when.
Interviewer: Ok, what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge are?
Participant: To make people more environmentally aware, to make sure that they… I mean before the charge I wouldn’t think, you know, twice of having loads and loads of carrier bags, it was one of those things you did, I don’t know why but you had to do it. You didn’t feel right unless you had about 500 carrier bags leaving the shop, but obviously now, people are more environmentally aware, they know, like these bags are going to go into landfill, and of course, it’s going to benefit through generations isn’t it?
Interviewer: Hm, and do you think that the charge is kind of successful in doing that?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you think that the introduction of the carrier bag charge in your country affected you?
Participant: No, oh yes, because it made me more aware. You know, I think everybody gripes about it at the beginning, but obviously it just makes you more aware of environmental issues, and of course recycling issues.
Interviewer: So do you think it changed any of your shopping behaviours or bag behaviours?
Participant: Yes, absolutely, I didn’t buy less, but I certainly sort of made sure than I kept the bags that I bought.
Interviewer: And do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person because of the charge?
Participant: Absolutely, absolutely, because of the charge I’m obviously sort of recycling everything. I, you know, one day I’m going to have grandchildren and I’m going to make sure that, you know, the environment is better for them.
Interviewer: Ok, and did you notice any changes after the introduction of the charge kind of in your local area, in your country?
Participant: No not really, no.
Interviewer: So just sort of your own behaviours?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, what do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is being applied in your country?
Participant: What do I think of it? I mean…
Interviewer: Yeah, the fact that it’s been sort of delivered?
Participant: It’s run well, I think it’s, yeah, it’s fine, you know, no doubt they will put it up, I think people will gripe if they put it up, but yeah, it’s fine, I’m sort of happy with it.
Interviewer: Ok.
Participant: I don’t think about it, it’s one of those things, you know, it’s one of those things that you automatically encompass in your shopping now.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: It is, yes, certainly with the shops that I go to.
Interviewer: Ok, so do you think anything needs to be the, changed about how it’s encouraged or not?
Participant: No, because you know, there isn’t a shop that I’ve sort of gone to, if I’ve asked for a carrier bag they’ve always charged me. I mean I don’t think it’s worth advertising because everybody knows now, it’s been introduced for such a long time.
Interviewer: Hm, when the 5p charge comes into effect in England, there will be some types of bag and some types of shops where the charge might not apply.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: So, small corner shops, for example, won’t have to charge for their bags, whereas bigger supermarkets will, so we’re just interested to know if you think that that’s fair?
Participant: I think that’s unfair because that’s going to hit, you know, the supermarkets, whereas they are trying to sort of bring the costs down, so why should they be penalised? You know, it should be a blanket charge across the board.
Interviewer: Ok, how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, such as, you know, like a congestion charge in busy cities?
Participant: It’s not, in all fairness, it’s normal isn’t it? I mean it’s not extortionate, you know, 5p, 10p for a carrier bag, everybody griped at the start, but now as I said, it’s nothing. I mean congestion charge, that’s more, you know, expensive, but a carrier bag, it’s neither here nor there. Obviously it’s just going to make people more environmentally aware.
Interviewer: So do you think you would be likely to support like other types of charge, such as, you know, plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables or plastic bottles? If there was a charge on those do you think you’d support that?
Participant: Yes, yes, absolutely, because it’s only until I come home and I put the plastics that I unwrap into the bin, you realise how much plastics are sort of wasted.
Interviewer: Hm, what do you think will happen, if anything, in ten years’ time as a result of this plastic bag charge?
Participant: Less in landfill, charities will benefit a lot more, and it would just be a way of life wouldn’t it? You know, really, it will just become a way of life.
Interviewer: Ok, do you save water at home?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of how?
Participant: I’ve got a water butt in the garden. What else do I do?
Interviewer: Do you use that to water the plants?
Participant: I’ve got a large washing machine and it’s, I’ve got an economy wash so I usually use that.
Interviewer: Oh yeah.
Participant: I’m trying to think, there’s loads. That’s it, I shower more than bath, that’s it really.
Interviewer: And saving water in these ways, is that kind of a habit or just…?
Participant: I’ve always done it, I’ve always done it. I’m quite environmentally aware anyway.
Interviewer: So do you, is that the reason why you save your water?
Participant: Yeah yeah.
Interviewer: Ok, and what about energy?
Participant: Yeah, I always turn the lights off, I always turn the lights off if I don’t need them. I certainly won’t put the heating on, you know, if it’s, if it’s a little bit cold in the morning, I always put my socks and my 'jamas on, and my dressing gown, just make sure I’ve got draft excluders by the door.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well?
Participant: I’ve always done it, you know, because I’ve lived on my own, it’s just something I always do.
Interviewer: And is that again for the environment, or?
Participant: It’s for me, I’m too tight to pay my gas and electric bill, I don’t give a… [laughs], and I buy energy efficient light bulbs.
Interviewer: Ok, and that’s sort of to save money?
Participant: Yeah, which I think, I think if you ask 99% of people, that is what they would say.
Interviewer: Yeah, probably, yeah.
Participant: I’m just being honest.
Interviewer: Well, honesty is sort of what we want, so that’s great. Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Oh now, that’s a question isn’t it? Yeah, well, plant pots, I try and light my compost, my grass cuttings, we’ve got a compost bin out the back. That’s it really, you know.
Interviewer: Ok, and again, is this a habit or?
Participant: No, it’s just something I’ve always done, I think it’s just, yeah, it’s something I’ve always done.
Interviewer: And is there any reason why you reuse these things?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Why do you do it, basically?
Participant: Habit, basically habit, literally habit.
Interviewer: Ok. So when you’re doing your food shopping in the supermarket, do you every pay attention to the packaging that, you know, the products are in?
Participant: No, never, why would that be? Not the packaging, not the packaging at all.
Interviewer: Ok, so the packaging is not very important to you?
Participant: No, not at all.
Interviewer: And you mentioned recycling, do you recycle your household waste then?
Participant: Always, always.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of what kind of things that you recycle?
Participant: Yeah, tins, glass, not a lot of glass, it’s always tins. Plastic, grass cuttings, waste paper.
Interviewer: Ok, and is that a habit as well?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve always done it because again, it’s better for the environment, it’s saving money, I haven’t got loads and loads of black bags for the landfill. Maybe before recycling I was up the dump maybe two or three times a day, a week, and I always maybe put two or three, you know, bags up there, and it’s cleaner, like my bag inside, it don’t smell.
Interviewer: Yeah, ok, and do you drive often?
Participant: Yes, every day.
Interviewer: And do you ever save up your car trips or not?
Participant: To be honest, I work so close to my home, I, you know, it doesn’t affect me at all. I mean I literally work maybe two miles away.
Interviewer: Oh ok, and do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is there, why, why do you try and drive…?
Participant: It saves me petrol, it saves me petrol more than anything, you know.
Interviewer: And do you walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yes, I walk the dog every day, yeah, I think that’s my walk intake, because obviously with work, I work in an office and I’ve got to look presentable, I’ve got to take the car.
Interviewer: Ok, so sort of how often do you walk or cycle?
Participant: Every day I walk, cycle maybe once a month for leisure.
Interviewer: For leisure, and do you plan to sort of do that? Is walking the dog a habit, or…?
Participant: No, it’s habit, I’ve got to because he’s a real fat thing, this is my budgie by the way ok? So if you think I’m going potty, it’s not, it’s the budgie.
Participant: I walk the dog every day, leisurely I plan a cycle ride maybe two or three times in the summer, if not more.
Interviewer: Ok, do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Never.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you don’t?
Participant: Expense and I’m always… I’ve got my brands for cleaning because I know that they smell nice, they, you know, with eco-friendly I’m not really fussed. You usually find there’s no scent to them and sometimes they’re just such natural products in there, I haven’t got much faith in them.
Interviewer: Ok, so you’ve kind of tied them and you’re just not very impressed?
Participant: I’ve got a lot of friends, yeah, and they’ve tried them and they aren’t impressed, and of course, nine times out of ten they are more expensive, so I am going to go with the cheaper brand.
Interviewer: What about organic foods?
Participant: Well, no, I don’t bother with organic either.
Interviewer: Ok, any reason?
Participant: Any reason? I wash my food, if there’s pesticide on there, I wash them. I’ve done a lot of work with organic farms anyway and it’s so strict, and again, it’s so expensive, you’re penalised for buying organic.
Interviewer: And what about sustainable foods that go towards protecting animal welfare, forests and fisheries and things like that?
Participant: I always buy free-range eggs, again, like most people, I put my head in the sand on a lot of things. I mean it costs more money, and in this day and age you have to look at your bills and sort of pay for what you can with what you’ve got, and nine times out of ten it’s more expensive.
Interviewer: Ok, is there any reason why you buy free-range eggs, opposed to…?
Participant: Cruelty, and the price isn’t that much more expensive than the caged hen eggs now, it is coming down in price, so I will definitely buy free range.
Interviewer: Do you ever support any environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: No, I’m being honest. If I’m passing, I will sort of put money in the PDSA, RSPCA, other than that, nothing else, no.
Interviewer: Ok, and all of these behaviours we’ve just sort of talked about just then, so like water, energy, recycling, all of that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours while you’ve been filling out the diary?
Participant: Not for the water, with the food, yeah, how much I recycle food, other than that, no, because as I say, you haven’t asked about, you know, like the garden, it’s just the foods more than anything.
Interviewer: So do you almost wish that we had asked you more questions about your garden?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, instead of putting things like, do I recycle cartridges and whatever? Yeah, maybe more about water recycling, garden clippings, you know, things like that, because again, that’s environmental.
Interviewer: Hm, ok.
Participant: And I would have done that more on a day to day basis than recycle or buy ink cartridges.
Interviewer: Yeah, did you, out of interest, did you mention any of that in the diary or not?
Participant: No, but guess what I’m going to be doing next time? [Both laugh]
Interviewer: Great, what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well it’s just literally you changing your behaviour to enhance the area and the environment that you’re living in. You making good choices to encompass a better life for the future.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: I am for future generations, and you know, if I can do small little things, and I think the older I get, the more environmentally friendly I’m becoming, and I think it is an age issue because I don’t think everybody, especially young sort of, think about it as much as us. I think you know, think about it as you get older, you think a lot about it more.
Interviewer: So you think younger people aren’t as environmentally aware?
Participant: My daughter certainly isn’t, and she’s 26, you know, and I watch her and she’ll just put everything into the bin, and I say, “Hannah,” and my seven year old’s the same, that’s the way they are, it’s an age thing.
Interviewer: Ok, and are there any particular or specific environmental issues that you’re quite concerned about?
Participant: Over-fishing, definitely, very concerned about that, more than any, yeah, I think that’s it really, so over fishing, landfill, things going to landfill, that’s quite worrying, that’s it really.
Interviewer: And what does the environment mean to you?
Participant: Where we live, your environment is exactly where you live, you know, that’s it really isn’t it? The environment you live in.
Interviewer: Do you think the environment is an important part of your identity and your life?
Participant: Certainly, yeah, because obviously what I’m doing is definitely going to make a change to the future isn’t it?
Interviewer: Hm.
Participant: And if we don’t make changes, we’ve had it.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: It’s a sticky one isn’t it? Some things you can’t keep, hold on, I’ve got to take my chicken out of the oven, I’ve just realised I’ve left my chicken in the oven, hold that thought, stay there.
Interviewer: Ok.
Participant: I am sort of concerned about it, and certainly by recycling it shows you exactly how much you are wasting, and I do, as I say, I do try and cut back, but you can only cut back a certain amount. As I say, you can only cut back, there are certain things that you have got to sort of recycle I suppose.
Interviewer: What about recyclable waste, does that concern you at all?
Participant: As in?
Interviewer: So actual, like things that are waste but they can be recycled, so like think, you know, your recycling bin?
Participant: Yeah, that concerns me, that does concern me, but as I say, you can’t, unless you actually start penalising people. It’s like the refuse, the recycling centre, they used to open all the black bags, and people would be fined, but of course then, you get the sort of, “Oh, well we can’t open in the summer because of personal hygiene.” So then people would go back into their old sort of ways.
Interviewer: Compared to other issues then in sort of modern society, so social and economic issues and health, how important do you think environmental issues are to you?
Participant: Extremely important, because as you say, it’s my every day isn’t it? It’s an every day issue, you can’t run away from the environment.
Interviewer: So maybe more important than other issues, or as important?
Participant: As important, there are certain other, you know, there are other things that I’m concerned about, you know, wildlife, destruction of all the wildlife that’s going on, the poaching, you know, over-fishing, you know, there are loads of issues, and I’m just sort of, it’s the tip of the iceberg. Because if I actually sat back and thought about it, I could bring a lot more to the table, but as I say, it’s just the certain things that do affect me. You know, child poverty, there’s loads of things.
Interviewer: Ok, do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, I could learn a lot more, I could learn a lot more, definitely.
Interviewer: What kind of things would you like to learn more about, if you know?
Participant: Oh goodness, I don’t know, you know, because I, because as you say, it’s the sort of thing you’ve got to sit back and think it through. I don’t know, I’m being honest with you.
Interviewer: Ok, do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yes, well as I say, where’s my charger, Mike? I’m going to plug my phone in because otherwise me and you are going to go, hold on.
Interviewer: Ok.
Participant: Are you still there?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: There you are, I’ve got one of these horrendous phones, it cost me like 50p I think, 20 years ago, everyone laughs at it, I should have left it in a museum, but anyway, that’s another story. Where were we?
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment?
Participant: Yes, definitely, conserve energy and we recycle, donate to charity, donate my clothes, you know, yes, I have.
Interviewer: Ok, and do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly, or not?
Participant: Yes, absolutely, absolutely, the Authority give me advice to recycle, give bags for everything, grass cuttings, everything, they cannot do any more.
Interviewer: And from the government and everyone, it’s all…?
Participant: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the regulation and legislation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: I don’t know much about it, I’m being honest with you, I really don’t know much about it.
Interviewer: Ok, is there anything else that you think could or should be done?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, I think everything that, as I say, I’m just a bystander, you know, I only know what I know, and I’m happy with the way that the government is actually running the recycling programme, yeah.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yes, absolutely, yeah.
Interviewer: Are there any of your environmental behaviours that you’re particularly happy with?
Participant: Yeah, conserving water, recycling plastic, you know, just stopping things going to landfill.
Interviewer: And are there any behaviours in this area that you’re not so happy with?
Participant: No, no, to be honest I’m happy with everything I’m doing at the moment.
Interviewer: Ok, so there’s nothing in your environmental behaviours that you’d like to change?
Participant: No, nothing at all. Maybe waste less food.
Interviewer: Hm, and what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: There aren’t any problems really, I mean we’ve got dog waste bins around, I mean some people chuck litter but we have got a regular refuge collection, that’s it really, it’s fine, absolutely fine.
Interviewer: Ok, and sort of, of everything we’ve talked about so far, is there anything that you’d like to add to or emphasise?
Participant: No, nothing really, I’m just happy, you know, I’m happy to carry on the way I’m going.
Interviewer: Ok, great, well that’s, we’re nearly at the end now actually, so I’m just going to ask you some demographic questions and then that will sort of be it.
Participant: Ok my lovely.