Interviewer: Does that sound alright?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, again, you know, this is just for you to have a chance, you know, sort of clarify your points of view and so on. Do remember that there are no good or bad answers, so, what we would like really to hear from you is your sort of, you know, what your daily routine is like and your personal honest points of view, that’s all. Nothing, you know, extraordinary or, you know, there are no high expectations whatsoever from anyone, so, just be normal, yeah.
Participant: Aha.
Interviewer: Do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Right, so, maybe just, you know, the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary filling experience at all?
Participant: Well, okay, there were just no problems with it.
Interviewer: What was, you know, particularly easy for you to do?
Participant: It was easy because you were just like ticking the boxes, so it was either yes or no, or they give you different things to just say either yes, maybe, no, never or whatever.
Interviewer: And was there anything difficult, like to write down?
Participant: No, nothing difficult.
Interviewer: Nothing difficult at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Good. Did anything surprise you in that?
Participant: No, it was all like straightforward.
Interviewer: So, maybe the first thing I wanted to speak about is your typical food shopping trip, so could you just describe how your typical food shopping trip was like?
Participant: Well, honest, I go to my local Asda, and I have a shopping list what Sonia made out. Basically, just go around and we buy just what’s on the list [?? 01:53]. And…
Interviewer: And… yeah, yeah, please go on.
Participant: Well, that’s about it really.
Interviewer: And how many times a week do you go to buy food, or maybe a month, I don’t know?
Participant: We do a food shop, we do the main food shop like every three week.
Interviewer: So the main food shop will be once every three weeks?
Participant: Yeah, like we do that, obviously, like we buy a like a lot, any tinned food in, any jars, any packets, any freezer stuff, we buy it, say, once every three weeks, and then we just buy like the fresh stuff, i.e., like your fruit or your salads or whatever, maybe bits of meat, just as and when we need it.
Interviewer: And those smaller food shopping trips, how many a week do you do?
Participant: Maybe one or two.
Interviewer: And are they also in the Asda?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And is this a big Asda or a smaller one kind of town sort of size?
Participant: It’s a big one.
Interviewer: It’s a big one, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What, how do you plan your food shopping? How do you plan how you’re going to buy what exactly?
Participant: We just plan it by, we work out what we’re [?? 03:19], and then we just find out what we need to buy and what we don’t need to buy.
Interviewer: And how do you decide what you will buy?
Participant: By anything we’ve got left, I mean, from the week before, or like the two weeks before, and what we bought over the week.
Interviewer: So just replacing things, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you tend basically to buy most of the time the same kind of things?
Participant: Most of the time, yeah. I mean, we do try and change every now and again, sort of have something a bit different.
Interviewer: And what kind of, when you change, what kind of things do you sort of change to and decide to buy something else?
Participant: We might change from, say, like chicken to pork, or maybe to lamb, or maybe to some kind of ribs, something like that.
Interviewer: And do you take a shopping list with you, did you say?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And who writes the shopping list, is that yourself or someone else in the household?
Participant: We both do it. We both just write down what we think we might need.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you choose food and what is less important?
Participant: Price is important, erm… [pause] but I think when you see stuff like by sell by date, that’s not a good part, is it, because if it’s fresh stuff you can freeze it.
Interviewer: Is there anything else?
Participant: No, not that I can think of, because when you go to supermarkets that’s maybe, that’s been reduced. It might have been a fresh piece of meat, but we can still buy that and freeze it.
Interviewer: So you would be looking mostly at the price, basically at the cost, what that will be, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you travel to the store? Do you go by car or do you walk or you take a bus?
Participant: By car.
Interviewer: You go by car. And how long, you know, what kind of distance is it from your house?
Participant: About two mile.
Interviewer: About two miles, yeah, and you always take the car to get there?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And also when you go for smaller shopping trips, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Would that be walkable at all, that distance, or not really?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Because it’s just more convenient to use your car.
Interviewer: And do you go to, when you go food shopping, do you go on your own or do you go, for instance, I don’t know, with your partner or with someone else?
Participant: I go on my own or with my partner.
Interviewer: Both, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate who buys what?
Participant: We don’t, we just have the shopping what we already spoke about and we just try and stick to that shopping list.
Interviewer: Now the next thing that I wanted to speak about is the bags, you remember in the diary there were quite a few questions about the types of bags that you use, yeah, to pack your shopping?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So the first thing I wanted to ask you is slightly unusual, if you could tell me a few words, expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag? What does it make you think of?
Participant: Erm… cheap, thin, not safe.
Interviewer: Not what, sorry?
Participant: Not safe.
Interviewer: Yeah, could you explain that?
Participant: As in like you could put too much in it and it’ll collapse.
Interviewer: Oh, yeah, yeah, of course, yeah. So it’s basically breakable and cheap, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And anything else?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you remember, you know, that point in your life when you came across the supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you?
Participant: Well, probably.
Interviewer: Then how was it, what kind of, you know, could you tell a bit about it?
Participant: Well, it was just different because people used to take their own bags at one time, and now people just rely on shops to give you bags.
Interviewer: So you saw just immediately that they were giving bags in shops, that’s it, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what kinds of bags and, you know, containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: It’s the plastic, like clear bags what they give away.
Interviewer: So, do you tend to buy the bags for life or what kind of thing do you do with those?
Participant: [?? 08:27] I wasn’t like comfy buying the bags for life and put them back in the car for the next shopping trip, but we kept forgetting to put them back in the car. So then we just ended up using like the clear bags again.
Interviewer: So, sorry, it was cutting, the line was cutting a little bit so I couldn’t quite hear all of it. So, basically, you buy bags for life and you store them in your car, is that correct?
Participant: Yeah, but then we kept forgetting to put them in the car, so then we’d go shopping with no bags, and having to use the bags again.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to take the, because the plastic bags in Asda, are they free or not, the normal ones?
Participant: Yeah, they’re free.
Interviewer: They are, so do you use those as well?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, is it, when do you take bags for life and when do you take the normal ones from, free from supermarket?
Participant: Well, I mean, we don’t use the bags for life no more because we kept forgetting to put them in the car, so we just rely on, so we actually rely on, get free bags.
Interviewer: And why is it that you, you know, that you try and bring your own bags, what are the reasons?
Participant: Just out, I think, just trying to [?? 09:46] bags sometimes rather than keep using them clear bags.
Interviewer: And why is it good for you to reuse the bags that you already have?
Participant: Well because reusing is recycling.
Interviewer: So what is good, actually, about bags for life?
Participant: Well, it means you’re helping to save bags what you don’t need to use. If you just keep reusing the bags for life and you’re not just taking bags because you need them.
Interviewer: And then why not using like, you know, personal bags from home, whatever they are, rucksacks and things like that?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t know, but, I don’t normally have a bag for work so that’s why I rely on bags for life or the free bags.
Interviewer: And what kinds of bags for life do you use? What sort of bags are they exactly?
Participant: The ones that Asda sell you, it’s like a thicker plastic one.
Interviewer: The thicker plastic ones?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And are those the woven ones, so…?
Participant: Well, they’re just normal, just a thicker plastic.
Interviewer: And how do they last, how long do they last for you, usually?
Participant: Well, maybe they last, I’d say like, I’d say a couple of month before we have to replace them.
Interviewer: Say it again, please?
Participant: I think they normally last a couple of month before we have to replace them.
Interviewer: And then you replace them for free, is that right?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you think it’s been given the name bag for life?
Participant: Because they intend it to last a life, but, obviously, it doesn’t, so, I think they know it needs replacing every so often, I think it all depends on how much you put in the bag.
Interviewer: And do you think it sort of, you know, the name bag for life, do you think it matches the use, how people use them, or not always?
Participant: Not always, but, not always, but it depends how people use them.
Interviewer: And when would they not match their name?
Participant: When people put heavy things in them and the bags start to rip, or things with sharp corners what make the bag split.
Interviewer: Is it, do you find it, you know, difficult to plan to take the bags with you or is it a simple thing?
Participant: Simple.
Interviewer: But then how does it happen that we all forget the bags, how does it happen in your case?
Participant: Because if you get home from work and you’re a bit tired and you’ve just done the shopping, and you just want to sit down for ten minutes, and then you forget to pick the bags up to put them back in your car.
Interviewer: And where do you usually store your bags?
Participant: At the moment they’re just kept in the kitchen.
Interviewer: At home, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And where about in the kitchen, some kind of cupboard or…?
Participant: We put all the bags that we can reuse again into a cupboard.
Interviewer: And, in your opinion, how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: It is important because you do need something to put your shopping in.
Interviewer: Excuse me, yeah, it’s been cutting again, if you could just repeat the same thing, sorry?
Participant: Yeah, it is important because you do need, people do need something to put their shopping in.
Interviewer: So you would say it’s important to have it, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, how would you find it?
Participant: Well, people would end up buying some kind of special bag or some kind of, like a sports bag what they’ve got at home and then they’d just do it that way.
Interviewer: And do you think that will be alright?
Participant: Yeah, because people will just get used to it.
Interviewer: And, now, I wanted to ask you, you know, the plastic bags that you, the smaller plastic bags that you take in supermarkets, the, you know, the thin ones, do you really reuse them at all at home?
Participant: Well, we use them to put in like a bin, like in the bathroom or the bedroom.
Interviewer: And how do you reuse them, then?
Participant: By putting them in a bin what could be in the bathroom or the bedroom.
Interviewer: Oh, I see. And how many of those bags do you currently have at home, do you reckon?
Participant: Probably about ten, ten bags.
Interviewer: And you usually reuse most of them, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you know what is plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, a bag for life or a plastic bag?
Interviewer: No, no, not for bag for life, but there is like a plastic charge for thin bags, have you heard of it before?
Participant: Yeah. No.
Interviewer: So, it’s basically, it’s a national charge for 5p for single use plastic carrier bags, so, basically, the thin bags, in some places in the UK, they have a charge for them.  For instance, in Wales and in Scotland, and in Ireland, I think, they’ve got, people have to pay 5p if they want the normal very thin bag that are currently free in England. Did you know about that?
Participant: I have heard it’s coming in. That a lot of people, a lot of shops are going to start charging for bags.
Interviewer: So you’ve heard about it, yeah, that’s it coming in in England?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how did you hear about it?
Participant: Just through the internet and the news.
Interviewer: Was it, do you remember, what sort of website it, was it news, the news you said, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, it was just, I think I heard it on just the general news that shops are to stop using the free plastic bags, and that they’re going to start charging for them.
Interviewer: And do you find this surprising that this happens?
Participant: No, because I just want, I just think that they want [?? 16:07] they want them to start reusing the bags rather than just keep taking them, and taking them and taking them, [?? 16:11].
Interviewer: So, do you think it’s good or do you think it’s not as good to have this charge?
Participant: No, it’s good, because then obviously it will help, it will make people [?? 16:25] without actually throwing it away, [?? 16:30] people will start taking them.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of this plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s to help, again, with the environment. Helping to recycle.
Interviewer: And do you think it can have an economic impact or social impact?
Participant: [Sighs] Well, I don’t know, it all depends, because different people, there’s people who look at it differently. People will look at it and they won’t be happy about it, whereas other people look at it and say, “Well, if they’re going to start doing charge for bags, I’ll [?? 17:15] taking one with me”.
Interviewer: Sorry, it’s cutting sometimes slightly, so can I just ask you to repeat the last thing you said?
Participant: Yeah, I think, I think many people take their own bags because, when it’s going to start the charge with them, but other people won’t be happy with it, but I think most people will say, “Well, if we’re going to start being charged, then I might as well start taking my own bags”.
Interviewer: And do you think the introduction of this 5p plastic bag charge will affect you personally or not?
Participant: No, it won’t affect me, no.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I’ll start taking my own bags.
Interviewer: So do you think you will start taking them a bit more often or all the time?
Participant: Yeah, I’ll start taking them, what I used to do, I used to have a big sports bag, I used to just make sure that, once I’d done my shopping, just make sure that, because it’s quite a heavy bag to have around the house, I make sure I put that back in my car straightaway.
Interviewer: And the reasons why at the moment you use more plastic bags for life than the, you know, the thinner ones, why is it exactly that you prefer the bags for life?
Participant: Because it’s just helping the environment and, obviously, you’re not just taking bags for the sake of taking them.
Interviewer: And, you know, how quickly do you think you will able to change when the plastic bag charge, it actually comes to England on the 1st of October, so it’s very soon.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how quickly do you think you’ll be able to change your bag use?
Participant: I can change it straightaway, you know, if it happened tomorrow, then I’d make a point of, like as from tomorrow, then I’d just take my own bags.
Interviewer: And do you think that will be easy for you, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, [?? 19:08].
Interviewer: Do you think it will change your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It won’t, and why?
Participant: No. Because you’re still going to buy what you need to buy, whether it involves taking your own bags or not.
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge can make you a more sort of environmentally friendly person or not?
Participant: Yeah, it will because, obviously, when you know that you’re going to start being charged 5p a bag, then, you know, I think people will make a point of taking their own bags.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any other changes after the introduction of the plastic bag charge, for instance, in your local area or in your country? Any kind of change, you know, whatever you can think of.
Participant: Erm… I can’t think of any changes that’ll make until it actually happens, because obviously people have different attitudes towards it. You have to just see and wait to see how it comes out and how people change.
Interviewer: And any kind of impact on the physical environment, do you think?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is encouraged, you know, sufficiently in the UK or is it not at the moment?
Participant: No, it isn’t, no.
Interviewer: And, you know, what do you think, why do you think it’s not encouraged?
Participant: Well, because it seems like it’s to make a point given you for the free plastic bags, I mean, some supermarkets you go in, you don’t really need it, sometimes, if you buy something what can fit in your pocket or you can maybe carry home, but you still make a point of actually using a bag.
Interviewer: And there is an interesting point that, you know, when this 5p charge comes to effect in England, there will be some types of bag, bags and sometimes of shops, you know, that will be exempt from the charge, so the charge will not apply for, I can tell you what kind of things, it will be small retailers and corner shops. So they won’t charge and also hot food and drinks, so any kind of fast food outlets, I imagine won’t be charged as well. Clothes shops I believe and also paper and biodegradable bags won’t be charged. Do you think it’s a fair thing to do or not?
Interviewer: Or maybe for some of them it will be fair and for some not.
Participant: Yeah, maybe, maybe if there’s, there’s some things you can understand, but I don’t think, I think it should, I think it should still be chargeable for like corner shops, because it’s a corner shop, you’re not far from home, so you can carry it. Obviously, if you’re buying hot food, then it’s a bit different because [?? 22:27] and maybe going through a drive through.
Interviewer: And I also wanted to ask you, to compare plastic bag charge with two other charges, one is congestion charge. Have you heard about congestion charge?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Like in London, yeah, the city centre.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, how does this plastic bag charge compare to congestion charge, from your point of view, and would you support congestion charge in your city?
Participant: Erm… [pause] I wouldn’t really support it in my city because I work like quite close to the city centre, so then it would probably affect me, and I start work quite early in the morn… I start work at like four, five o’clock in a morning, so I can’t get public transport.
Interviewer: So it will be very inconvenient to you?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: It seems to me that in London the congestion charge, it also depends on the hours, because weekends and probably like night and early hours, again, not included in the charge. I believe so, I might be wrong. So, in this case how would that be?
Participant: If it’s set to a certain time limit to say, if they say between nine and five, then it wouldn’t affect me, because I’d be coming out of the congestion area probably, inside those hours, but I wouldn’t be going into it inside the hours.
Interviewer: And how does this charge, the congestion charge, compare to the plastic bag charge, is there anything, you know, in common or not?
Participant: Yeah, because [?? 24:07] again, it’s all about the environment, they’re trying to like get people to stop using their cars and to use public transport.
Interviewer: And if we imagine a second charge which doesn’t exist yet in the UK, but in exists in other countries, in Germany, for example, it’s a little deposit that people pay for plastic bottles when they buy drinks in plastic bottles, they pay again something like 5 or 10p extra which they can get back if they bring them to the outlets, how is that in your opinion?
Participant: Yeah, that’s something that used to happen a few years back, well, quite a few years back, where you used to buy a bottle of pop and they used to put like a 5p on it, and when you took the bottle back, you used to get 5p back.
Interviewer: The glass bottles, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So would you support that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Also, I wanted to ask you about, you know, what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of plastic bag charge introduction in England, if anything?
Participant: What do I think will happen?
Interviewer: Yeah, well, in about ten years’ time, let’s say, the plastic bag charge is going to be introduced now in October, and then what do you think, what kind of impact it will have in about ten years’ time, you know, just in your imagination?
Participant: [Sighs] I don’t know, I think it’ll just encourage people to think more about what they’re doing.
Interviewer: And will there be any like environmental impact?
Participant: Well, there should be really, because if we’re not using as much plastic, then, obviously, it should help the environment.
Interviewer: So there will be an environmental impact, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Thank you very much. Now we’ll move to something slightly different. You know we talked about all kind of different behaviours, there was like a list at some point in the diary, about different behaviours, and I will just ask about a few of them, not all of them, but just a few. And also, you know, to ask whether you do those and why you do those, if it’s something habitual for you if you do that, you know, without thinking really, or if you have to plan it, kind of, things like that and just give examples. So, the first one is, do you save water at home, at all?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: No, we don’t.
Interviewer: So, for instance, if you brush your teeth or if you take shower, do you think about how much water you sort of consume or not?
Participant: I’ll say because I’m only in the shower for about three or four minutes anyway, and the water, obviously if I’m brushing my teeth, I don’t actually think about why [?? 27:02].
Interviewer: And do you have water meter?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And why is it not important for you to save the water?
Participant: It is important, I just think about it.
Interviewer: Oh, I see, so it’s kind of automatic, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how about energy, sorry, in which ways do you save energy at home?
Participant: We always turn the lights off when we’re not in the room.
Interviewer: Anything else?
Participant: Erm… [sighs] we do leave things on standby, which you shouldn’t do. So [?? 27:48].
Interviewer: So did you say you leave those, or you switch them off?
Participant: No, we leave things on standby when we shouldn’t do.
Interviewer: And is, again, is this something that is just a habit or not?
Participant: Well, it’s just a habit.
Interviewer: Do you reuse things at home at all?
Participant: We reuse?
Interviewer: Do you reuse, reuse?
Participant: No, not really, no.
Interviewer: So, if you, for instance, I don’t know, if you get magazines or if you get jars, do you like reuse those again, or do you just put them in the bin?
Participant: They’ll be recycled.
Interviewer: You recycle those, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you look at all at packaging in supermarkets?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Is this important to you at all, how much packaging there is?
Participant: No, it’s something I don’t think about.
Interviewer: Is it something you don’t think about?
Participant: Yeah, it’s something I don’t think about.
Interviewer: And what do you do with your household waste at home?
Participant: We do recycle most of it.
Interviewer: So what do you recycle, for example?
Participant: Either tins or jars, or anything that we can, papers, cardboard, bits of plastic.
Interviewer: And how are your recycling facilities? What kind of bins do you have for the waste?
Participant: We have them, like the brown bins for plastic and the green bins for bits of gardening waste, and the blue bins for cardboard and a black bin for your general waste.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the food waste, for example?
Participant: The food waste, depending what it is, if you have veg and you have like peelings, that goes in the composter. But any kind of food waste that we have usually, most of it we put in the dogs bowl for the dog to eat.
Interviewer: Oh, right, yeah, that’s practical, isn’t it? A dog’s always practical [laughs].
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how often do you drive?
Participant: How often do I drive?
Interviewer: Hmm, mmm.
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to try and save the car trips or not really?
Participant: No, because I can’t, I can’t get any transport because, obviously, I start work early. So I can’t get any public transport.
Interviewer: And regarding, you know, your way of driving, do you try to drive in the way that you save fuel at all or not, you don’t really think about it?
Participant: Yeah, I always drive in high gear where possible, I always did that because the car’s quite modern, I can keep an eye on how many miles to the gallon I’m getting and stuff like that. So I always keep an eye on stuff like that.
Interviewer: And, again, is this something for you that is habitual that you do all the time anyway, or do you have to think about it?
Participant: [?? 31:07], I don’t think about it, it’s something I do naturally because obviously, if I’m driving fast kind of thing, then it’s, even though I might be saving time, it’s actually costing me money because I’m using more fuel.
Interviewer: And do you walk or cycle for short distances at all?
Participant: I do walk a lot, because I take the dog out three or four times a day.
Interviewer: And is that sort of for leisure or…?
Participant: Well, it’s for leisure because I enjoy doing it, and, but obviously I have to do it because I have to walk the dog. So, but I do enjoy doing it anyway.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly cleaning products at all?
Participant: No, eco-friendly are more expensive than what we normally buy.
Interviewer: And how about things like organic or sustainable food?
Participant: Again, that’s more, organic is more expensive than normal, so that’s why we don’t buy it.
Interviewer: Does it also happen to you to support environmental organisations and issues or not?
Participant: It’s not something we do, but I suppose we should do really.
Interviewer: And how do you think that should be done?
Participant: Just by watching what you use, your energy, like just reusing anything like, obviously like your plastic bags, I suppose what we should do is look at using [?? 32:41] more, different stuff like that, rather than just keep recycling.
Interviewer: Do you, you know, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So it was just as usual, what you were doing usually, that’s what it was, yeah, during that period?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you at all?
Participant: I suppose it just means, just being aware of what’s happening around you and like the way you, like your driving, the things you’re doing. Well, if you sit down and think about it and you look round the house, like how many light switches are left on, wall switches are left on.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Because I don’t really follow it, it doesn’t really bother me that much. So, I could say [?? 33:55] I’m not really concerned about it, but I should be.
Interviewer: So, again, it was slightly cut, so, again, you were saying that you were not really concerned but you should be, and why?
Participant: Because it’s something that we should be looking at, you know, it’s, the people are trying to help us in the way we’re living, then, it’s obviously got to be for a good reason.
Interviewer: And what kind of sort of parts of the environment you think, you know, sides of the environment are more important, you know, that deserve really attention now, really kind of urgently maybe, what do you think?
Participant: I think people should be told more about how much energy, like especially in your house, and then they should be, they should be asked to switch off all the switches on your appliances, rather than leaving like TVs and things on, like Sky boxes and PlayStations on standby. You should be told to switch, have to switch them all off just [?? 34:59] to see how much it affects you.
Interviewer: And apart from the energy is there anything else that, you know, you think could be encouraged for the environment?
Participant: I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: And what does environment, the environment mean to you basically?
Participant: Well, I suppose it’s just like, it’s the place we live in. It’s the house, the street, the work, you know, the environment is something what affects you, what affects you personally every day.
Interviewer: And would you say that environment is an important part of your identity, or not necessarily?
Participant: Not necessarily, no.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because it’s something that I suppose you’ve not been brought up to look at. It’s only been coming up for the last, say, maybe five years, where people are starting to look at the environment and, well, I think the only people what look at it is young people, but young people because it’s something that they’ve been brought up with. They get, [?? 36:25] become part of their routine.
Interviewer: So, and do you consider, is environment an important part of your life at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And again, if you can explain a little bit?
Participant: Because, depending on what age you are, a lot of people weren’t brought up to think about the environment, but the younger people, now, because they watch the news and it’s something that they talk about in school, they’ve been brought up with it, so they look at it a lot more.
Interviewer: So you consider yourself belonging to a slightly older generation who doesn’t really think about it? Am I understanding right or not?
Participant: Yeah. But mainly because we wasn’t brought up to think about it and the younger people are.
Interviewer: And are there any other reasons, you know, or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no. I think it’s just how things are brought up at the time.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: We don’t have a lot of waste because, obviously, we [?? 37:46] inside the house. We try and recycle, especially, like anything that comes in a tin or plastic, or a plastic tray, or box, or any kind of newspaper, it’s always recycled.
Interviewer: Another thing I wanted to ask, kind of touching upon this, is compared to other issues, you know, in today’s society, basically, things like, you know, social, economic, health, whatever, how important the environment is compared to those for you?
Participant: Erm…
Interviewer: If you thought about the priorities for, you know, what happens currently in the world, or in your country, does it, you know, whichever level is good for you to speak about, how important the environment is compared to things like social things, or economics or health, whatever?
Participant: I think it’s important and it’s something what more people should look at, but because of the kind of world we’re living in, people find it hard. It’s not something what comes as a priority, it’s just something what comes, what’s down the list kind of thing, just trying to, some people find it hard to get by for each day, so it’s not something that they look at. It’s, I don’t know, for some people it’s not a big priority to look at something like that.
Interviewer: And how to say, if, you know, why do you think the social, economics and health are more important for people in general than the environment? What’s your opinion on that?
Participant: Well, it’s the way they’ve been brought up, because a lot of people, it’s not something we was pushed into when we was either at school or [?? 40:08]. So it’s something what’s further down the list. What’s, people might say it’s not important, but it should be.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: I probably don’t know enough of them.
Interviewer: You probably, sorry?
Participant: I probably don’t know enough.
Interviewer: And, you know, that I’m proposing, but I’m just wondering if, potentially, it would be interesting for you to improve them if you were, you know, willing?
Participant: [?? 40:44] Well, it’s something really when I’ve got more time. What I should do is go onto the internet and look at it that way, just see more about it, rather than disregarding, the idea of then just looking for views and let them tell me about it.
Interviewer: And how do you think this knowledge can be improved, in what respects?
Participant: It should be put more into, onto the news, what people watch, and put more onto the internet.
Interviewer: And what they should learn more about?
Participant: Well, mainly about, more about how it can affect you, maybe, you can reduce costs, [?? 41:32] looked at it.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Probably not.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Again, because it’s not something what we was taught, I was on, when I was at school or when we at sort of, at some kind of higher education at the time, it’s not something what was looked at, it’s just something what’s come out in the last few years.
Interviewer: And, again, do you think you would like to improve these skills at all or not, given the time, or maybe later?
Participant: Maybe if I found time to sit down and just think, “Oh”, like I’ve spoken with you today, and I’ve got half an hour tonight when there’s nothing on the TV, so I look at the internet and I look at the environment and, you know, [?? 42:36].
Interviewer: And do you think, do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: We do get support but I think we should get more.
Interviewer: And what kind of support is kind of good at the moment?
Participant: You get a lot of support from the local councils, because obviously they provide you with the bins to help you with recycling. We have actually gone out, probably about eighteen month ago, we went out and bought a composter for the garden. So any like, kind of like veg peelings and grass, any kind of weeds, it goes into the composter. So instead of going out and buying compost, we make our own compost.
Interviewer: And what else do you think the local governments could do for people to give them more sort of support or infrastructure, whatever?
Participant: I don’t think they do enough, but I don’t know how much more that isn’t just people. Because you’d have to buy, because they have provided us with bins and things like that, but there’s only so much they can do, because it’s up to each individual person.
Interviewer: And do you think environmental organisations or private companies could do something to help people in that respect?
Participant: They could try to help people more but then, again, like I said, it all depends on the, you can’t force people to look at the environment. Other people might sit down and look at it a bit more and have a talk about it, and some people just say, “I’m not interested”.
Interviewer: And do you think there is enough sort of legislation or regulation around the environment in our country at the moment?
Participant: Well, yes and no, because there is some, but, you know, I mean, it is more what’s happening, I’d say there’s more what’s happening each week to help you like recycle, i.e., like the plastic bags, so that’s coming in, so that’s trying to help people.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment?
Participant: I’m happy but I could do more.
Interviewer: Yeah, as you were saying. Right, we nearly came to the end of the questions, there’s just a couple of remaining things.  I wanted to ask you about your neighbourhood, what are, for you, the main problems in your neighbourhood at the moment?
Participant: It’s, well, because I live in a cul-de-sac, there’s quite a few kids on the street, so it can, because the noise, because it’s a cul-de-sac, they’re like stopping in the street and they can get quite noisy.
Interviewer: The noise on the street, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is that, again, it was cutting a little bit, so is that because of, you know, some kind of young people?
Participant: Yeah, because we’ve got quite a few kids on the street where I live, and it’s a cul-de-sac, so the noise stops in the cul-de-sac and then the parents let the kids out on the street, and they don’t teach them about litter and stuff like that, so they’re dropping litter on the floor.
Interviewer: And is there any kind of problems related to vandalism or anti-social behaviour?
Participant: No, no, there’s no vandalism. It does get a bit anti-social sometimes like late on at night, but that’s not always the kids.
Interviewer: And what do you like about your neighbourhood?
Participant: Because it’s a small street everyone knows each other, so even though, because it’s small where I live, people all watch out for each other.
Interviewer: And just more a kind of, a bit wider in sort of local area, not necessarily the couple of streets around but kind of slightly larger area, what are the positives of it?
Participant: Again, even though, because I’ve lived in the area, because I’ve lived in this area and I work all the night, most people like know each other because erm… most people know each other [?? 47:25] friends, so they either know you personally or most people know of you.
Interviewer: Can you, so, basically, this is the end of my questions. So I just ask you a couple of demographic questions at the end, but if there was anything, you know, that you can think of that you may be forgot to mention or would like to emphasise, if, you know, anything surprised you?
Participant: It has surprised me a bit because I think a lot of its to do with the environment and recycling, but I didn’t, obviously, it has been different as well about what I’m doing, more of what I’m buying I suppose, yeah, I’ve [?? 48:13] more thinking, if I open a bin and I see a plastic bag in a normal waste bin, then I’ll pick it out and put it into the plastic bin.
Interviewer: So it made you think of those things, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Great, anything else that you wanted to add?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, great, thank you very much.