Interviewer: So how did you find filling in the diary overall?
Participant: ...such as what did you notice about your recycling and what was difficult for you, I found that a bit challenging to answer because I didn’t really notice anything, if you see what I mean, it was fairly, you know, pretty much the same all the way through, the same volume of recycling, things like that, we’re creatures of habit in our house so we don’t really stray much from our normal food routine. I enjoyed, I did like sending the receipts! [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: I’m not sure why, when I bought, then I’d get a little bit excited and think, right, I need to take a photograph and email! [Laughs] So I enjoyed that part.
Interviewer: Yeah, well that’s really appreciated, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, and I found as well, the... Which question was it? There was a question and it asked you... Let me think, there was a whole host of questions all in one and you said, I did this today or I did not do this today or not applicable, such as you turned the lights off when not in use or plugs off, that was good because I found that it improved, I improved as well, as for answering that question, if I would turn the lights off I would think, ah, I’ll turn another light off or I’ll turn this plug off, it made me more aware. Yeah, it made me more aware of...
Interviewer: This was actually not our intention but if...
Participant: Oh!
Interviewer: ...people did it naturally that’s perfectly fine, yeah.
Participant: Yeah. Yeah, I did find, I did, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, great if that helps you, yeah. Okay, thank you very much and maybe the first... You know, do you have anything to add to the diary before we move on to the first set of questions or...?
Participant: No, nothing at all.
Interviewer: Great! So maybe the next thing I wanted to speak to you about is the shopping routine, so if you remember there was a little bit of that in the diary.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is if you could describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Um, I tend to buy things as I go along, I don’t really have one day per week where I’ll do a full week’s shop because there’s just two people in my household and both of us pick up as we go along. So it could be that while I’m in work I’ll text my fiancé and I’ll say, I fancy fish tonight for tea, do you want to grab some on the way home and he will or it’ll be vice versa. We don’t really do like a typical day, Saturday shop for the week, we pick up as we go along. Yeah, and normally it’s in one of the large supermarkets on the way home from work. Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah. And how many times a week would you go to buy some food?
Participant: Just myself or both of us because, you know, we...
Interviewer: Maybe, yeah, maybe let’s speak about the household in this case, yeah.
Participant: The household. Okay, maybe... Hm, gosh, it’s quite a lot! Maybe three or four times a week. Yeah, and we usually spend I’d say between... I’d say about between ten and fifteen pounds maybe at a time. So if I text him and say, will you pick up fish tonight, he’ll pick up the fish but he’d also pick up for example maybe a bag of potatoes, maybe some milk and some bread as well, just to keep things going, just to top-up, that’s the kind of way we work, yeah.
Interviewer: And you also mentioned that sometimes it happens to you to go for a main kind of food shop, yeah?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: You also mentioned that sometimes it happens to you to go for a big food shop.
Participant: No, we never do.
Interviewer: Oh, you never do that. Yeah, sorry.
Participant: No, we just pick it up as we go along, like when we’re getting low on a particular item we’ll just pick it up that night.
Interviewer: How do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Um, normally, every morning I’ll be making my lunch for work and I’ll notice things that are running low, like again for example, like the milk or whatever and then either myself or my fiancé will get them on the way home, so it’s not always really planned, it’s quite sporadic but in terms of things going low I suppose, yeah, I do plan that slightly. I’ll notice it in the morning when I’m either making breakfast or preparing my lunch for work for that day and then either myself or my fiancé will pick it up then in the evening on the way back home from work.
Interviewer: Yeah, great.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what stores do you use to buy food? What kind of supermarkets or shops?
Participant: Mainly it’s... Well mainly it’s Asda because that’s quite close to us but there’s also a Tesco as well. Yeah, it is mainly those, I suppose we have used some of the smaller supermarkets as well such as, you know like an Aldi’s or a Lidl’s, sometimes we use those, we tend to enjoy going to those for like fresh fruit and fresh veg but for non-fresh food, so for you know the bag of potatoes, again, same example but that’s mostly the like chain supermarkets, we find that they’ve got the best offers.
Interviewer: And what size are those supermarkets that you go to? I mean, Lidl and Aldi they’re almost mostly the same but the Asda and the Tesco, are those the big ones?
Participant: They’re the really big ones, yeah, the Asda that we’ve got here is a hypermarket and the Tesco that we go to is the Tesco Extra store, so it’s really large as well, on like an industrial, you know, retail park so it’s a really big store.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And what is important to you when you choose food and what is sort of less important?
Participant: Um, what’s important? Like I said I don’t really like to stray too much from what we’re used to, so it’s quite plain really! I always have the same sort of things but the price is important as well, I wouldn’t want to buy anything that was not a good value, I like to buy things that are on offer as well but again, provided that it’s not straying too far from what we’re used to eating. Yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to the store, you mentioned driving I think, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, it’s always driving, when we’re on the way home from work. Yeah, always by car.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to go to any local stores on foot or...?
Participant: Oh, very rarely, not the... Do you mean sort of like maybe the corner shops or things like that?
Interviewer: Yeah. Yeah, some kind of local, yeah.
Participant: Um, very infrequently, it’s always the larger ones really. As I said, we’ll go there, we’ll aim to get something for dinner for that night but we’ll also pick up things that are low, so we’re going to do like a smaller shop but it’s always more than what you would normally buy in a corner shop for example.
Interviewer: Of course, yeah.
Participant: Sorry, can I just have one moment, sorry?
Interviewer: Sure, yeah.
Participant: Just one second. Sorry! [Pause in recording] Sorry about that! I do apologise.
Interviewer: That’s okay.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Yeah. And when you go to buy food do you go usually on your own or do you go together with your partner or someone else in the family?
Participant: It’s usually on my own. Yeah, very... Well I mean sometimes, on an occasion where we haven’t done the shopping on the way home from work and we’ve come straight home and had dinner, then maybe we would go out together then but it’s not very often. Usually or I would say nine times out of ten it’s myself.
Interviewer: Yeah. And how much of your food goes to waste every week would you say?
Participant: Um, I wouldn’t say much. We limit the fresh food because my fiancé doesn’t eat much fresh food at all! He doesn’t eat fresh fruit or veg so when I do buy fruit it’s always for myself so I wouldn’t... No, I would say less than 5% I think would go to waste.
Interviewer: And what kind of things usually get wasted?
Participant: I do notice sometimes bananas might get wasted, if I’ve left them for too long and they’ve gone very soft and very brown sometimes they will go to waste and what else would I say, sometimes yoghurts, if I maybe buy too many because they’re on offer and then the date has expired, perhaps those but that’s very rare, I would say bananas maybe mostly, fruit that has gone bad.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you wanted to add to your shopping sort of routine or story that you didn’t cover?
Participant: I don’t think so. Oh, sometimes actually, going back to the point about the corner shop, sometimes on a Friday or a Saturday night we’ll buy alcohol from the corner shop! [Laughs] Because of course it’s the weekend and you know, but it’s always a spur of the moment thing with us, we never really plan very well! [Laughs]  So we haven’t really got into that kind of routine but if we’re sitting there and we say we fancy, you know, a nice bottle of wine tonight, we’ll perhaps get one from the corner shop, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So we’re kind of moving a little bit onwards and maybe the next thing that I wanted to ask you about is a little bit unusual, if you could tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear ‘supermarket plastic bag’, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Oh! Um, oh gosh! For some reason the only word I can think of is frustration because I can never open them! [Laughs] I would say frustration slightly because I can never seem to open them but... Oh, unreliability because they always seem to break. Wasteful because I just find them so wasteful. We pay for them here as well so another thing again is when I think of supermarket bags I think of, well I now thing of bags for life because we take our own, we keep them in the car boot and we use them and if I do have any, I would think of the word bin liners because I perhaps try to use them again but the smaller reusable 5 pence, you know, the flimsy thin bags, yeah, I think those words would describe that.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And do you remember that point in your life when you came across supermarket bags for the first time?
Participant: Oh gosh! No, I don’t. I used to work at a supermarket so my answers might be slightly tainted but I suppose maybe when I was about sixteen or seventeen when I first started maybe, you know, wanting to buy my own things and I was living at home and I wanted to buy my own things, yeah, maybe sixteen or seventeen. Yeah, when I would buy my own perhaps, I don’t know, crisps or well you can buy DVDs and things like that in supermarkets now can’t you, so yeah, about that age, yeah, late teens.
Interviewer: That’s interesting, yeah. And do you remember any time when, you know, not any time but do you remember kind of the before plastic bags appeared in the shops or not?
Participant: No! Gosh, no, I couldn’t, I wouldn’t even think how you would you pack your items actually. I couldn’t tell you how long plastic bags have been in use, it must be a few years.
Interviewer: Yeah, exactly. And what types of bags do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: Yeah, we always use the bags for life, it’s very rare that we would buy the, you know, what are they, the thin bags, we always use bags for life.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags for life are these?
Participant: We’ve got a mixture, we’ve got quite a collection. [Laughs] I like the heavier...
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, I’m ready to listen.
Participant: Yeah, I like the heavier duty ones so like the hessian bags I’m a fan of, I’ve got quite a few of those, I find them very reliable and then I have got several of like the 10p bags for life, the 10 pence ones, usually with a pattern on and I try to use those if we buy meats or anything for the fridge or freezer, I keep those in there and then the hessian bags then I’ll use for bottles and heavier items, yeah, so it’s quite a mixture.
Interviewer: And so the 10p bags for life, how long do you think they last usually for yourself?
Participant: Um, I suppose because I use them for certain things, I don’t use those for anything heavy, I’ve had them for a while, I would say several months with myself but provided I don’t use them for anything heavy and I think because we’ve got such a collection of them, I’m happy to use a lot of bags because we’ve got them there. I would say, yeah, I would say a few months.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what do you do with them when they break or when they kind of finish, whatever?
Participant: I recycle them, I throw them in the plastic recycling.
Interviewer: Do you sometimes exchange them in the stores or not?
Participant: I always tell myself I will but I never do, I never remember, I’m quite bad at that! [Laughs] No, I don’t think I’ve ever exchanged one in the store because when I get there, it’s usually the last thing on my mind and you’ve got to make the effort to, you know, when you’re getting the bags out ready to pack you’ve got to remember there’s a broken one in there and remember to ask for a new one, I never remember to do that, I’ve never swapped one. Yeah, just replace them.
Interviewer: Yeah. And how many of these 10p bags for life do you currently have at home?
Participant: How many do I have?
Interviewer: Yeah, just approximately.
Participant: Um, I would say five per car, so ten. Yeah, about ten, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you use them all to bring your shopping or sort of not to bring it but to take them food shopping when you go or do you take just some of them?
Participant: We take... Well we’ve split it between our two cars so we take them all, we just leave them all... We pack all of the bags for life into one larger one and just carry that around, we keep it in the boot of the car and take the whole or the bigger bag with everything in, so we’ve got the choice then.
Interviewer: And the single-use bags, the very thin ones, the 5p bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How often does it happen to you to take those if that ever happens?
Participant: I don’t have any. I never buy them.
Interviewer: Okay, so you don’t take them in shops, no?
Participant: No, I never buy them. I mean if, for example, I was caught out one day and the bags weren’t in the boot and I was buying maybe one or two items I might be tempted to buy the thin bag but I don’t have any right now and I don’t think my fiancé has any in his car either.
Interviewer: Yeah. And where do you normally store bags just in general, you know, that you take with you food shopping, is that in the car or somewhere in the house?
Participant: Always in the car.
Interviewer: In the car, yeah.
Participant: Always in the boot, when we’ve unpacked the shopping it just goes straight back into the boot.
Interviewer: And why do you do that?
Participant: They’re always there, so like I said because we shop so regularly we always know that we’ve got bags there, it would cost us a fortune in bags if we didn’t! [Laughs]
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you find it easy to do in this kind of way?
Participant: Yeah, it was, at the beginning it was remembering to put them back in the boot as soon as you’ve used it was a bit of a challenge but what we do now is if for example it’s raining and we don’t want to go outside to the car, we’ll just lay the bag on... Our flight of stairs is right by our front door so we’ll just lay it on the front door so the next time we’re going out we’ll remember to take it with us to the car.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, it’s just devising systems.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And what do you think, you know, in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores, just in general?
Participant: I think it’s very important because not everyone, I mean in Wales, you know, as you know and I’m sure you’ve probably got English participants as well in your study but obviously...
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, we do, yeah, we have England, Scotland and Wales, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, well in England, we’ve had the paper bags for, I think it’s a few years now isn’t it, so I think we feel very differently to your English participants in this.
Interviewer: True, yeah.
Participant: I think it’s important because not everyone is used to having to take their bags around with them, like the English participants and also not everyone I suppose is as bothered, maybe some people don’t place the importance on bags for life for example, so I still think it is very important and again, you could just be caught out one day and forget to take the bags. It is important, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely. And what would happen if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores?
Participant: Oh! Well I suppose... I mean, you’d have to find somewhere else to buy them and I’m sure there are other retailers who would be happy to cash in on something like that but I can’t see it being a good thing, but again, no-one would have a choice would they so... It wouldn’t be popular, I don’t think, it wouldn’t be a popular idea.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to re-use the bags for life that you have, the plastic ones, for anything else other than, you know, bringing food in them home?
Participant: Is it the very thin re-usable bags or the plastic bags for life, like the 10 pence ones, which ones sorry?
Interviewer: The 10p ones, yeah.
Participant: No, it’s mainly shopping and like I said, maybe if I had a broken one I’d perhaps use it for a bin liner but mainly shopping. Yeah, there was a stage where I’d use it to take my lunch into work but I’ve got a lunch bag now, so yeah.
Interviewer: Great, yeah. And do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Yes. Do you want me to tell you?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, so it’s 5 pence for the thin bags, 6 pence for bags for... Well 6 to 10 pence, it varies from shop to shop and then well it goes up from there really doesn’t it?
Interviewer: And what do you think about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Um, I think at first I was a bit... What’s the word to use? Maybe annoyed, I don’t know and then I learnt that most larger supermarkets give a percentage of that fee to a charity so that made me feel a bit better and then when I developed a system of keeping the bags and keeping up with them and putting them back in the car, I’ve never thought about it since, it’s part of daily life now.
Interviewer: And did you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising at all or not?
Participant: Um, yeah, a little bit. Yeah, slightly, I didn’t know how, you know, everyone kept saying, oh I don’t think it will last long but it has, it was a bit surprising, especially considering that there still isn’t a charge in England, Scotland and I think Ireland [?? 21.49]?
Interviewer: Well England and... Sorry, Scotland and Ireland already have them, it came a bit later.
Participant: Oh, they do?
Interviewer: Yeah, Wales is the champion basically and then Scotland and Ireland came in a bit later and England...
Participant: Oh, I see, okay.
Interviewer: England is coming in just now in October.
Participant: Ah right, okay, so we’ll all be the same then. Oh right, okay, that’s good to know.
Interviewer: So what do you think about this and why did you say you found it surprising in the beginning?
Participant: I think because, you know, I was so used to, well everyone was so used to having unlimited amounts of bags, you know, you could... I can remember, you know, you would see people with their shopping and they’d be doubling up the plastic bags even when there wasn’t a need to and I suppose the thought of having to cut back and be more responsible just came as a shock perhaps, it was just something that you’d have to think about when you’ve never had to think about it before.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what do you think is good and what is probably not as good about the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: Um, well as I said I think it’s good that a percentage, I think a small percentage does go to charity, I did read that somewhere before, I think I saw it in Asda that a small percentage went to Wales Air Ambulance so I think that was very good, I also think that it’s responsible, it’s making people more aware so that all the landfill sites aren’t... Well it’s not being abused I guess and I suppose I don’t like the thought of, you know, supermarkets perhaps making a profit off it, I think because it was so available for so many years, I don’t know, something in me doesn’t like that and I also, I was always under the impression that the charge for the plastic bags was just for plastic bags, no other type of material bags and then, I don’t know if I’m right in that or not but places such as McDonalds and things like that, they charge for paper bags now and I’m not very keen on that idea.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I feel that the charge was meant to be for plastic and that I feel like these corporations are just cashing in on something that’s not actually contributing to any sort of environmental factors, I think it’s just to make a profit. I mean I could be completely wrong but that’s sort of what I’m thinking at the moment.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah. And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Um, I think it’s environmental factors, it’s to be more responsible with our plastic use and for recycling purposes.
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge fulfils this purpose?
Participant: I think so because you don’t... I don’t see anyone paying for two single-use carrier bags now just to double up on, you know, say dog food, it appears that there is less use now and it seems like customers in shops and stores, supermarkets are more responsible with their bags, you do see people wandering round with their own bags for life and that’s good, it is cutting down on plastic.
Interviewer: Yeah. And did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in Wales affect you when it came into effect, you know, when it came to you here in Wales, yeah?
Participant: Um, yeah, I think it affected, I think it affected everyone didn’t it because you’d forget and you know, if for example you were in a smaller shop and they’ll only accept a debit card if you spend over a certain amount and then once you’ve paid for your items you haven’t got money for a carrier bag, I’ve been caught out in that situation before! And you can’t obviously then pay for a carrier bag for 5 pence on your debit card, it was all getting used to it so it did affect me in the beginning, it was just getting used to the idea and developing a system of having the bags for life, returning them to the car and being responsible and remembering them every time you shopped. Yeah.
Interviewer: And how quickly was it to change your previous habit of bag use?
Participant: It did take a few weeks. Um, how long would it take? Um, oh, it was... I think it was more difficult for me and my fiancé because like I said, we don’t do the weekly shop, I think if we were like the typical household who went shopping say every Saturday morning then we probably would be more inclined to remember but at the beginning, putting it back in the boot of the car all the time and remembering this, that was difficult, we didn’t do well for quite a few weeks. [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: It did take us a while to get into that system, into that routine.
Interviewer: And then did you gradually kind of, how to say...
Participant: Improve?
Interviewer: Well no, I mean, sort of... Well decided that it was, you know, easier to have... Because I have to say there are not many people who act as efficiently, a lot of people forget their bags and I think personally...
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: ...I think I probably shouldn’t be sharing this but like I think it’s so easy if you drive, it’s so easy to keep your bags in the car then you don’t forget them.
Participant: It is, yeah. Yeah, well that’s what we try and do.
Interviewer: [?? 27.44] them at home, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how did you...
Participant: Yeah, it is easier.
Interviewer: How did you figure out this amazing strategy?
Participant: [Laughs] My grandfather! My grandfather...
Interviewer: Really!
Participant: Yeah, my grandfather told me to do it. No, we both said, my grandfather said to do it and then we said it’s a good idea if we keep bags in both cars because then at least if one of us has forgotten it the other person can do the shopping so we wouldn’t be caught out. That way we’d always have bags for shopping even if it wasn’t in both cars but no, it was my grandfather that came up with that idea!
Interviewer: And does your grandfather preach what he says?
Participant: Yeah, he is really good with his.
Interviewer: So he is practically organised as well, yeah.
Participant: He’s very organised, he’s great!
Interviewer: Fantastic!
Participant: Yeah. [Laughs]
Interviewer: And would you say that plastic bag charge has changed any of your shopping behaviour at all or not?
Participant: Um, no, none of my shopping behaviour, it hasn’t altered any of the foods that I buy or the quantity or anything like that.
Interviewer: Or shops where you go or kind of number of times a week that you go?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, not really.
Participant: No, it’s all stayed the same really.
Interviewer: And do you think you became a more environmentally friendly person after the charge has been introduced or not really?
Participant: Yeah, because I have stuck to using the bags for life and I don’t just buy a bag and throw it out and not recycle, I try to... Yeah, I would say, yes. I also find as well, I found after the plastic bag charge I kept up more with the recycling, so for example, I would take all of the apples out of my plastic bag and then the plastic bag for the apples would then go into the recycling, it just made me more aware as well. It did affect in other areas, yeah.
Interviewer: And have you noticed any changes after the plastic bag charge has been introduced? I mean it’s been now for a couple of years in Wales hasn’t it?
Participant: Yeah, it has been a few years.
Interviewer: So what kind of changes, if you noticed any changes then what kind of changes are they?
Participant: Um, you don’t see as much mess in the supermarkets and what I mean by that is it used to be, if you’d look at the end of the till or the self-scan tills, like the serve yourself tills, there’d be plastic bags everywhere before, it used to look really messy and I always used to think that would be quite a, you know, a slip hazard! But I’ve noticed that they’ve disappeared now because they hand them to you don’t they and so I’ve noticed that supermarkets look, well the supermarket selling points, you know, the checkouts look neater. Um, what else have I noticed? I can’t think of anything else I’ve noticed. I’m not sure if I’ve noticed less plastic bag waste on say for example streets or things like that. Um...
Interviewer: Not really, not something that you’ve noticed?
Participant: No, not really, no, but the supermarket is the main one, yes.
Interviewer: And is there anything in the way that, you know, the cashiers... Well how the plastic bags, you know, made visible in the shops or the way cashiers sort of offer them or anything like that?
Participant: Yeah, whenever we go shopping, they’re never on display, they’re always underneath the till and they ask you if you need bags but we always have the bags with us so... Well I always have the bags or my fiancé always does, so they just say if you need any bags let us know and we never do because we’ve got so many! Got a collection, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah. And do you think that bag re-use is sufficiently encouraged in the UK or not, just in general?
Participant: Um, I don’t think it’s encouraged, I just think that they’ve implemented the charge, I don’t think that anyone actively tries to encourage people re-using bags, no.
Interviewer: What I mean is probably as a part of culture or anything like that?
Participant: Um, I don’t really know, I’m not sure how to answer that question. I mean, the only example I could think of perhaps would be like my grandfather, he encouraged me to re-use bags as we discussed but apart from that, no, I would have to say...
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, sure, yeah. Another question I wanted to ask you about, you kind of touched upon it already but there are a couple of other things I wanted to kind of find out about it.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: You know when the 5p charge comes to effect in England there will be some types of bags and also some types of shops that will not charge 5p for their bags and the shops that will not charge are in the outlets basically, it’s medium to small retailers and corner shops, as well as takeaways and clothing shops, those will not charge 5p.
Participant: Ah! In England?
Interviewer: And also types of bags, these are paper and biodegradable bags are not going to be charged, as well as the little transparent bags that you can find in the fruit and veg.
Participant: Fruit and veg, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, so what do you think about this?
Participant: Um, well, that’s not the case in Wales! [Laughs]
Interviewer: No.
Participant: No, well I think all plastic bags should be charged for so that we can encourage people to re-use bags so I don’t really understand why they think that that’s a good plan. When I say they, you know, the government implementing the charge, I don’t understand why they think that that would be a good plan to charge for supermarket plastic bags but then not the retailer bags and takeaway bags, they’re all plastic bag so I don’t think that’s a good idea. I don’t like this encouraging bag use.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And another thing I wanted to ask you is to compare plastic bag charge to a couple of other charges. The first one is higher fuel duties, you know, for environmental reasons, so basically to discourage people from driving too much or kind of abusing of, you know, of driving all the time, the potential is to raise, so in some countries that’s applied, you know, raising the fuel prices for these environmental reasons, how do you think that compares to the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it could work very well depending on where you lived, I think maybe metropolitan cities for example, like London where you could easily access different, you know, various methods of transportation, tubes, train, bus etc. I suppose that would be a very good idea, you know, they’ve already got the congestion charge, so I suppose why not but I suppose the more rural areas where you need to take a long journey to get to work, I’m not sure that would benefit people because... Well I can’t see how it would.
Interviewer: And another type of, it’s not really a charge and it doesn’t really exist, you know, it exists in Europe in some places in Europe like Germany and Austria, it doesn’t exist in  the country, it’s a charge on plastic bottles that...
Participant: Oh!
Interviewer: Yeah, well it’s a deposit that when people buy anything, you know, basically bottled in plastic, when they bring the bottle back, empty bottle back they get the deposit back as well, what do you think about that?
Participant: Um, are we talking if they bought a bottle of pop from the supermarket?
Interviewer: Yeah, for instance, if they bought a bottle of Coke, yeah, which usually comes in a plastic, not the glass but we could speak about the plastic just now.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, and when they buy it they pay a little deposit, something like 20p for instance but when they bring it back they get this deposit back in [?? 36.16].
Participant: Right, okay.
Interviewer: Uh huh.
Participant: Um... Hm, that’s a tough one. I could see the purpose of that, obviously it’s to encourage recycling and to be responsible for recycling materials, however, you know, it would seem then that you’d need to get yourself back to the place where you bought this plastic bottle and that could then contribute to the fuel and things like that, I’m not sure, I think it would be better targeted at recycling from home, you know, perhaps stronger sanctions for those who don’t recycle and that would then be on the local authorities.
Interviewer: Yeah. Do you have anything like this in your local area or not?
Participant: I think the local authorities here do random sort of inspections of people’s bags and I think if you’re found not recycling you get fined.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen in about ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: I’d like to think that it’s getting better because I can’t remember, you know, I’m only twenty-five but I can’t remember a time where... Well I can’t say I can’t remember a time, recycling and environmental factors, I can’t say it’s very new to me but I didn’t grow up in this sort of environmentally aware, you know, sort of way of thinking, it’s a new thing to me and I think that it can only improve from here so I think that in terms of recycling and the impact on the environment, I think it’s going to get better especially in ten years. I think everyone’s more aware of the issue.
Interviewer: Would there be any direct impact on the environment do you think?
Participant: I’d like to think it would because I’d like to think that this would be the primary reason that everyone’s doing this. Yeah, I’d like to think so.
Interviewer: Great! Okay, thank you very much. So we’ll just move to the last set of questions which is...
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Well one of the first ones, maybe I’ll just ask a couple of questions, you know, from that list when I was asking did you do this, did you do that.
Participant: Okay, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you tend to save water and energy at home?
Participant: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: Why might you say you’re doing this?
Participant: To keep fuel bills down, that would be, I’ll be honest, that would be my primary reason for doing it is to keep the bills down and also to not waste, it would be a waste to leave a tap on and it would be very irresponsible.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what kind of things do you do in order to save water and energy?
Participant: Well like I said, there’s only two of us living here so the kettle is only ever filled to the minimum really that we need, turn the water off when, you know, in between brushing teeth and I’ll be honest, I mean if you go to the loo perhaps, it doesn’t always need to be flushed every single time for, you know, anything that’s small. Washing things in the sink, I mean if it’s just something small there’s no need to run a completely fresh bowl of water, you can re-use water that was maybe used not long back. Things like that, yeah, and oh, in terms of energy as well, every day before I leave I turn plugs off, that’s not always just for energy use, that’s because I’m always very paranoid as well about house fires! But I suppose it’s a double, it’s for both reasons, I’m worried about house fires, especially in terms of things like phone chargers and internet plugs and overheating and also again, it’s going to save on fuel bills and it’s irresponsible to be having energy on for eight hours a day when it’s not even in use. I can’t understand why anyone would do that.
Interviewer: Yeah. Does it happen to you to re-use things at home?
Participant: Um, I re-use... I’ve got a good example for this actually, we’re out of season now but when it comes I like to do a lot of gardening and I grow a lot of vegetables such as tomatoes, things like that and I use yoghurt pots, you know, Muller Light yoghurt?
Interviewer: Uh huh.
Participant: I re-use those to start off my plants because they’re the ideal shape really, I just poke a few drainage holes in the bottom and I always re-use those. I tend to re-use plastic bottles as well to take to work, to fill up water at the water fountain. Um, I think that’s...
Interviewer: Yeah. And what do you usually do with your household waste?
Participant: Household food waste or...?
Interviewer: With basically any of it, yeah.
Participant: I recycle everything, I’ve got a food bin inside the house, one of smaller like [?? 41.49] bins inside the house and just outside the back door I’ve got three bins, I’ve got a plastic bin and I’ve got glass and tin bin and then I’ve got like a general, you know, whatever doesn’t go into those bins bin. Yeah, and you know, like I said, if it’s raining or whatever, I can just pop it by the back door and pop it out later. It’s all recycled.
Interviewer: And what would you say about your recycling facilities in your local area?
Participant: Um, I’d say they’re great. The Baling Plant isn’t far from my house and yeah, they’ve got... Yeah, it’s great, it’s got everything that you need there.
Interviewer: And what sort of things do you like particularly about it, I mean in terms of maybe how it’s organised or anything like that?
Participant: Um, it’s quite spacious, which is very helpful especially on the weekend because they’re always very busy on the weekends and the people who work there are very helpful and everything is clearly identified, you know where you’re going, you know where your bags need to go. Yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to buy eco-friendly products or organic or sustainable food or fair trade, anything like that?
Participant: Um, I have, I have sometimes, it’s not something that I would go out of my way to buy, mainly and awfully sorry to be so selfish but I find that the prices are extremely overinflated, I think perhaps if I was earning more money I might be tempted to but at the moment I find that they’re very expensive. Yeah, I was looking at them, eco-friendly washing liquid the other day and it was over double the price of a larger, you know, standard non-eco-friendly washing liquid and it was too expensive for me to justify, that’s the issue that I had.
Interviewer: And do you support environmental organisations and issues at all, does it ever happen to you to do that?
Participant: Um, it has. I’m signed up to an online website, I’m not sure if you’ve heard of it, it’s called change.org.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, I’ve signed up for that, I’m quite an animal lover and I do tend to have a lot of emails on change.org about signing petitions, the most recent one was Cecil the Lion so things like that I sign up to on a regular basis actually.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you would you say about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m quite concerned but even more so when it involves or when it impacts wildlife, that’s what I would say would be my driving force for it, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah. And why would you say you are concerned about those things or like living beings, yeah, the wildlife?
Participant: I think I’ve... I think, I can see that things have improved, I’m not sure, like I’m not sure if it was as a result of the carrier bag charge but it seems nearly everywhere you look now there are recycling bins, for example, you know, when I was in university, you know, a few years ago, they had recycling bins everywhere and say supermarkets tend to have recycling bins and where was I the other day, my gym, my gym now has recycling bins, things like this have all improved and I think yeah, that’s the reason why I’m quite concerned about environmental factors, well not concerned, I can see that it’s improving and I just want it to continue to improve for future generations.
Interviewer: And what does environment mean to you in general?
Participant: Environment is, it’s the area where we live or our surroundings and it means, well I’d like to think that it means comfort so long as everything is, you know, how can I put it? Not working okay but so long as everything is... How can I say it? Is happy and everything is going well for the environment, yeah.
Interviewer: Would you say that environment is an important part of your identity at all or not exactly?
Participant: Um, no, not exactly. Yeah.
Interviewer: Could you kind of explain a little bit on this?
Participant: Yeah, of course. Like I said, I’m concerned about the environment, I don’t like it when people litter at all, I’m not sure if this is classed as environment but I don’t like it when people are smoking around other people, I mean it all affects the atmosphere I think and strangely enough I don’t really like aerosol sprays! But in terms of whether or not that’s, you know, it’s affecting animals and things, that’s another thing, it’s very animal driven with me, I’m very invested in wildlife and animals and obviously that has an impact on the environment. But in terms of me and my identity I wouldn’t say, no, I wouldn’t say it affects my identity. I can’t say why. Um, I find that very difficult to answer, um... I suppose, my primary reason for being concerned about the environment, as I said, is animals so if it’s not impacting animals in a negative way I can’t say I’m 100% invested in other environmental factors. Am I explaining myself clearly? I’m not sure if I’m...
Interviewer: Yeah, I think so, yeah, yeah, that’s fine.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Absolutely.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: And if we were thinking, you know, about more like the global environment, things like that, so more like environment, environment when we speak about the green issues, how important are they to yourself compared to things like social, economic or health issues, either in the country or in the world, whichever...?
Participant: It’s not as important in my eyes...
Interviewer: Not that important?
Participant: No, I mean I suppose it should be but it’s not. Yeah.
Interviewer: Where would you say they come for you in the list of priorities?
Participant: What the environmental, like green issues?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah.
Participant: It would be on the lower end of the scale, there are things that are higher on my list of priorities such as health and things like that. Maybe about midway, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, I don’t. Maybe that’s why I’m not as invested in it because of my lack of knowledge.
Interviewer: Uh huh.
Participant: It could be that, yeah.
Interviewer: Would you say that you would like to improve this knowledge or not necessarily?
Participant: Not necessarily. Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that there is enough support that is provided by the government or environmental organisations to people, you know, to be able to learn more or to do more for the environment?
Participant: Yeah, I think, it’s not really... In my eyes it’s not made out as something very interesting. Well I’m not captured by green issues, if you see what I mean, it doesn’t capture my attention if I saw someone speaking about it on TV for example, I don’t feel that it’s made exciting, it doesn’t seem to capture an audience in my mind, that could just be though because I don’t find it that interesting.
Interviewer: And can you just shortly again briefly explain why... I’m just trying basically to clarify the points of view, that’s all, I’m not, you know...
Participant: Yeah. No, okay.
Interviewer: I’m completely neutral to these questions so I’m just trying to...
Participant: That’s okay, you ask...
Interviewer: ...clarify the position of each person, yeah, about this.
Participant: Of course, okay. So yeah, you’d like me to explain...?
Interviewer: Yeah, why it is not as important or not as capturing your attention and so on, yeah.
Participant: I’ve never found it that interesting. Yeah, I’ve never really... I’ve never wanted to learn more, it’s just never been something that’s interested me. Like I said, it does interest me if wildlife are involved and if any animal is involved it does but just environmental green factors has never captured my attention, it’s never made me interested, I’ve never wanted to learn more.
Interviewer: And when these are connected for instance to some social or health issues or whatever that can be the risks and things like that?
Participant: That does interest me more because that would then obviously have a direct impact on mine and my family’s life or my friend’s life if, like you said, a social or health issues, yes, if there is because I could see the direct link then because you might be thinking green issues would, you know, inadvertently have a direct impact, however, when it’s a social or a health issue I could see that it would, I can see myself that it would have a direct impact then and it does make me more interested, I do want to know what it is and the risks and how it can be prevented. Yeah.
Interviewer: And would you say that you are happy with what you are currently doing for the environment or...?
Participant: Yeah, I’m happy, I don’t feel like I contribute greatly to any, you know, negative environmental factors, I don’t, you know, I don’t sort of smoke and like I said, I rarely use aerosols, I try to drive in a very fuel efficient way, yeah, I’m happy, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah. And would there be anything that you would like to change in this or to be able to do other things, have you thought of any of those at all?
Participant: Um, I would like to not drive as much but I don’t live close to my work and I live in quite a rural area, I don’t live in a built-up city. Yes, I would like to not drive as much but it doesn’t seem like a feasible option for myself.
Interviewer: Great! And just the last question that I wanted to ask you today is about your neighbourhood. What would you say are the good features of your neighbourhood, those that you really like and what are those that are slightly problematic perhaps?
Participant: Right, problematic, we don’t have any recycling bins at all, it doesn’t...
Interviewer: Right. Really!
Participant: Yeah, nowhere.
Interviewer: How do you recycle, is that in bags, council bags or...?
Participant: It’s all at home, yeah, it’s all got to be done at home, so if for example, I’m walking my dog and I’ve got a plastic bottle of water, there are no recycling bins for me to recycle the plastic bottle.
Interviewer: Oh right, yes, so on the streets, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, it’s... Yeah, nothing on the streets.
Interviewer: Oh, I see, yes.
Participant: Yeah, I’d have to take it home with me, I’d have to carry it and take it home and recycle, so that’s a negative part, there’s no... Yeah, there are none, there are just... I’m trying to think because I walk my dog often and I obviously pass a lot of bins. No, there aren’t any out on the streets, for example, there are none. And what is good is I think our Baling Plant is very good, like I discussed with you, it’s very clearly signpost, it’s large, it’s clean, it is very good. We’ve also got a lot of green areas where I live as well, there’s a lot of playing fields and what are they called, you know, the playgrounds for children, a lot of green areas like that which is nice, I like to be outdoors. So yeah, but the recycling bins, that’s a big one.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what are the things that you like in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Like I say, yeah, I do like the greenery in our neighbourhood, there’s a lot of greenery and... Oh, I know one thing as well is the local authority has... I think, was it, it was very recent, I think it might have been last year, they changed all of the lampposts to energy bulbs, which was great, I thought that was a fantastic idea! You can imagine how much that would save across the district.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, but the green areas are great where I live.
Interviewer: Great! Okay, I think I came to the end of my questions so...
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: ...if there is anything else, Hannah, that you wanted to add to this or before we finish, anything to emphasise?
Participant: Um, no. I think I’ve given you a lot! [Laughs]  I think that’s everything. I can’t think of...
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t think I can think of anything else.
Interviewer: Great!