Interviewer: Could you please tell me maybe to begin with how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: At first, in the first day I found it quite hard, but after that it was just easy, it took about 5 minutes to do, so I just found it easier.
Interviewer: And what did you find a little bit difficult in the beginning?
Participant: Just about the waste, asking how much waste you’ve put away and all that, asking your family, then asking what type of bins you use, but after that, after the first day it was just easy.
Interviewer: And was there anything that you found easy or you liked about it?
Participant: It was just all the same.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: The bin, asking what type of bins you used.
Interviewer: Say it again please?
Participant: They asked you what type of bins did you use, that surprised me.
Interviewer: Right, I see, and why did that surprise you?
Participant: It was just I never thought they’d ask what type of bin you would use, I thought it was just about type of food and all that you buy.
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, it’s kind of more like on household behaviour so that’s why we included the bins and like recycling and stuff like that, yeah, that’s why. Okay, anything else you wanted to add to the diary before we move on?
Participant: No, that’s it.
Interviewer: Okay, great, so precisely now I wanted to move on to the shopping, so if you could tell a little bit how your typical food shopping trip looks like?
Participant: It’s my mother that buys the shopping, it’s just the basics, milk, bread, meat, tins of food and a couple of bags of crisps and that’s about it.
Interviewer: And how many times a week or a month do you go to buy food?
Participant: Say 2 times a month.
Interviewer: About 3 times a month?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what kind of, or does it happen you also is this 3 times a month is that like the main shop?
Participant: Yeah, it’s the main shop.
Interviewer: And how many times would you need to kind of go for a top-up to buy like milk or this or that?
Participant: Probably about twice a week.
Interviewer: Something like that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what kind of supermarkets do you go to?
Participant: Tesco or Sainsbury’s.
Interviewer: And when you go to do your main food shopping trip which of those do you most often go to?
Participant: Tesco.
Interviewer: And for the top-up things?
Participant: Just the local shop.
Interviewer: Which would be, what kind of…
Participant: Spar.
Interviewer: Spar, something like that, sure, and why do you prefer Tesco?
Participant: It’s just closer, closer to our house.
Interviewer: And how big is it?
Participant: It’s a big one.
Interviewer: Is it like superstore or not, or?
Participant: Yeah, it’s a superstore and there’s a, it’s got Extra as well, just down the road from us as well.
Interviewer: And you also say that you go to Sainsbury’s yeah, sometimes?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how big is that one?
Participant: That’s big as well, that just got refurnished so they made the place bigger.
Interviewer: Say it again please?
Participant: It just got refurnished, they closed a couple of the shops next to it to make the Sainsbury’s bigger.
Interviewer: And so which one do you think you will be going to most often since the Sainsbury’s just reopened?
Participant: Tesco.
Interviewer: Tesco still, and why is it Tesco for you, preferable to you?
Participant: Better deals.
Interviewer: Say it again please?
Participant: Better deals on food.
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, and what is important to you when you buy food?
Participant: Just the basics, milk, bread, meat and tins of food.
Interviewer: And what kind of sort of you know, how do you choose your food in terms of you know, it can be several kinds of bread obviously when we go to shop, what kind of criteria are important to you?
Participant: We just get the ones we always get, it’s always Warburtons or sometimes my mother gets ones that are on deals, like rolls, special rolls.
Interviewer: How do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: We don’t, it’s just out of the blue.
Interviewer: Do you take a list with you sometimes or not?
Participant: No, no list, we just walk around the shop to see if we like anything.
Interviewer: And would you say that you tend to buy the same kind of things or do you mostly go on offers and stuff like that, or both?
Participant: Both.
Interviewer: So how would you say when you go about the shelves, how would you select the things?
Participant: If they were, if we seen something they were doing a deal and we liked it we would get it, but if it wasn’t on deal we probably would only get one and not buy a lot of it.
Interviewer: How do you usually travel to the supermarket?
Participant: Car.
Interviewer: By car, and how far is it from your place?
Participant: Yeah, a 5 minute drive, yeah.
Interviewer: And when you go to Spar you mentioned, how do you go there?
Participant: Walk.
Interviewer: And that one, how far is it from your place?
Interviewer: Do you usually go to buy food on your own or with someone?
Participant: It’s my mother that buys it but I sometimes buy like juice and that for myself, I do that myself.
Interviewer: Do you know how much food usually goes to waste at your you know, at your home?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you yourself you know, kind of waste some food?
Participant: If I’m not hungry, if I feel like I’m hungry and then I eat about 2 bites and then that’s me full and then I just fling it away.
Interviewer: Okay, is there anything else that you wanted to add to the food shopping before we go to our next set of questions?
Participant: No, that was all.
Interviewer: That’s fine, yeah. The next thing I’m going to ask you is a little bit unusual, could you tell me 5 words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “plastic bag”?
Participant: Not cheap, sometimes, plastic bag, useful, that’s all I can think of, not cheap and useful.
Interviewer: And do you remember when you came across the plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Did you say yes, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And could you speak a little bit about this moment?
Participant: I’m trying to remember now, it’s just they’re charging 5p for a bag and there’s no need.
Interviewer: Yeah, great, and what kind of bags do you normally use when you go food shopping, you can maybe first speak about yourself and if you like afterwards you know, when you go with your family?
Participant: For myself I just use the bags in the shop.
Interviewer: So you get the 5p bags, or?
Participant: Yeah, the 5p bags, yeah, it’s just one.
Interviewer: And how many of those would you say you take a week?
Interviewer: Something like that, yeah, and is there a reason why you take those because you said it’s not cheap?
Participant: It’s because I’m buying a lot of stuff and I keep forgetting to lift a bag.
Interviewer: And at your home do you kind of use bags for life, well any kind of you know, what sort of bags you know, are usually brought when people go you know, to do a big shop?
Participant: My mother brings her own bags, the big, heavy bags, so she doesn’t have to pay the 5p for them.
Interviewer: Yeah, and that is the bags for life that she takes?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of bags are they?
Participant: Thick bags.
Interviewer: And are they kind of big size as well?
Participant: Yeah, big, thick bags.
Interviewer: Fantastic, yeah, and do you have any kind of bags that you sometimes take shopping with you or not really?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: Do you ever use you know, any of your own bags when you go food shopping in terms of like your, I don’t know what you can take, something to work or do…
Participant: I sometimes use the…
Interviewer: Like a rucksack or anything like that?
Participant: Yeah, I use my backpack to bring lunch to work and I sometimes use the 5p bags that I’ve kept and use them.
Interviewer: Okay, so you kind of reuse them, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how many times would you say you can reuse those?
Interviewer: Okay, something like that.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you take the 5p bag as opposed to maybe the you know, the bags for life, those that cost you something between 6p and 10p?
Participant: It’s just because they’re too big and I’m not putting a lot of stuff in it, with the 5p bags it’s just a couple of things and I can just tie it up and take it with me.
Interviewer: What would you say is good about this you know, 5p bags and what is not as good?
Participant: Well they’re not good because they cost 5p and they shouldn’t, and they’re good because it’s just in case you want to carry something that’s too heavy, you can just shove it in one of those wee bags.
Interviewer: And what is good if anything?
Participant: You can put heavy stuff into them and just carry it about with you.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores, in supermarkets?
Participant: I think it’s very important because people could be buying a lot of things and they don’t have any bags to put them in.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, how would you find it?
Participant: I don’t think I’d be going to the stores, I think I’d be ordering everything online if there wasn’t any plastic bags.
Interviewer: Do you think people will sort of change if you know, what do you think people would do if the bags completely disappeared you know, the plastic bags, of course not all bags?
Participant: The plastic bags, I think people would start bringing their own bags, like backpacks and just using them if all the bags were gone.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to reuse the you know, the thin 5p bags that you get in the supermarkets?
Participant: Yes. Were you going to say something there?
Interviewer: Say it again?
Participant: Were you going to say something there?
Interviewer: Yeah, you mentioned that sometimes you use them again to bring them shop with you, yeah, but any you know, other kind of ways to reuse them or not?
Participant: We use them for rubbish as well, rubbish bins, instead of black bins.
Interviewer: And do you also buy bin liners like black bin liners or anything like that?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And do you know approximately, I’m not asking you the exact number but just roughly how many of those 5p bags do you currently have at home?
Participant: About 3.
Interviewer: About 3?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to any other you know, family members to bring those home or not, like to your mother, you said she does shopping?
Participant: She just uses hr own bags, she doesn’t pay for the 5p bags anymore.
Interviewer: And do you know why?
Participant: I don’t know why, I’ve never asked her.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: I’ve never asked her, I don’t know.
Interviewer: No, okay, that’s fine, I just thought you know, sometimes people say something about it, that’s fine, and do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Participant: For big bags?
Interviewer: No, it’s the smaller ones.
Interviewer: And when have you heard of it for the first time?
Participant: Can you say that again?
Interviewer: When have you heard of it for the first time?
Participant: Last year I heard it.
Interviewer: And what do you think about it?
Participant: I think it’s annoying because people could be going to the shops and think they’ve got enough money to buy whatever they want and then they need to pay an extra 5p for the bag and they might not have the extra 5p.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that the charge was introduced?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Why is it surprising?
Participant: Because it’s like I said, people could have enough money to buy their own food and they think right, we’re going to get a free bag and then they say, “right, it’s 5p for a bag”, and they don’t have any money left, so.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Recycle I think, so people would stop buying them and just keep using the ones they’ve got.
Interviewer: Do you think that the charge is fulfilling these purposes?
Participant: Not really, I think they should just take away the charge and give you the free bag.
Interviewer: And why do you think it’s not working?
Participant: It annoys people sometimes.
Interviewer: And so do you think people started to bring more their own bags or kind of…
Participant: Yeah, I think more people are starting to bring their own bags now instead of…
Interviewer: And do you think there’s any impact like on the environment at all, or not?
Participant: I wouldn’t really know.
Interviewer: Yeah, but just imagining, what do you think?
Participant: I think it would help the environment.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, that’s alright, and has it affected you at all you know, one year ago when the charge was introduced did it influence you at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So has your bag use always been like this in the past?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And did you take, kind of before the charge has it happened to you you know, to take plenty of bags with you, or not really?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: It has, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So would you say you are taking a little bit less now, nowadays?
Participant: Yeah, I’m taking a little bit less now.
Interviewer: So is it kind of keeping you conscious a little bit about it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Great, and another thing I wanted to ask you, has it changed your shopping behaviour, like your shopping routine at all when it was introduced?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, it hasn’t?
Participant: No, it’s the same.
Interviewer: And do you think you have become a more environmentally friendly person or not?
Participant: It’s just the exact same.
Interviewer: Exactly the same, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is encouraged in Scotland, or not?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And what makes you say so?
Participant: People that’ll go into the shop instead of paying the 5p they could just use the bags that they already had, and just keep them.
Interviewer: Okay, right, I have a couple of other questions which are a little bit more like lively, hopefully, so you know when the charge has ben now introduced in mot part of the UK, so Wales was first and then Scotland then Ireland, and just in a couple of, less than a couple of weeks’ time also England is going to have it, so basically the whole of the UK is going to be covered by the charge, and you know in Wales the charge is very similar, and in Ireland I think, it’s very similar to what you have in Scotland, so it’s like a blanket charge, it’s applied everywhere, but in England there are going to be a couple of exceptions, and I wanted to ask you opinion about you know, what you think about this, so the places where you will not pay 5p will be medium-to-small retailers and corner shops, and takeaways, and also clothing shops. What do you think about that?
Participant: I think it’s going to annoy people, especially for clothing shops because people, they’ll be carrying about empty bags just to go a wee bit of shopping, but everybody basically does it online anyway, so.
Interviewer: And what do you think it will annoy in particular?
Participant: Shoppers, it’s just people in the shopping malls.
Interviewer: But why do you think they will be annoyed, I don’t understand?
Participant: It’s like I said before, they might have enough money for the clothes they want to buy, they might not have enough money for the bag.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, no, what I mean is that this will not be charged, okay?
Participant: Oh, it won’t be charged, okay.
Interviewer: So in Scotland you have to pay everywhere, yeah, wherever you go you have to pay your bag, yeah, and in England it’s not the case, so for a couple of those exceptions as I say like small and corner shops, takeaways and clothing shops, you are not going to pay 5p.
Participant: You’re not going to pay?
Interviewer: Yeah, so what do you think about that?
Participant: I think it’d be good, I think it would be good.
Interviewer: Uhuh, and why?
Participant: So you don’t need worry about asking do you need a bag and then they say, “right, 5p”, and then they just give you the bag, send you away.
Interviewer: And how do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges for example higher fuel duties, higher petrol prices basically for environmental reasons?
Participant: I wouldn’t really know because I don’t drive, so I’m not really buying petrol.
Interviewer: And would you support his kind of charge, the rise in prices of petrol for environmental reasons?
Participant: Again, I wouldn’t really know because I don’t buy petrol.
Interviewer: Alright, yeah, and what do you think about another type of charge, like the little deposit that people would pay for when they buy a plastic bottle, like a drink in a plastic bottle, when they return the bottle they get the deposit back, something like probably 20p or 30p, what do you think about that?
Participant: I don’t think that would work because mostly everybody that buys juice flings their bottles away in the bin.
Interviewer: But you know, at the end of the day if people bring like 10 bottles they get £3 back.
Participant: It’s just the same as the glass bottles, Irn-Bru, that’s what they do, if you take your glass bottle back down to the shop you get 30p.
Interviewer: And why do you think that is not working really?
Participant: I just, I don’t think it’ll work on plastic bottles because people just once they’re finished they’ll put it in the bin.
Interviewer: So nobody cares really, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen you know, like now the charge is going to be introduced, the 5p charge for the bags is going to be in the whole of the UK, what would you say will happen in 10 years’ time because of this charge, as a result of it?
Participant: I think it’ll be dearer for a bag, I think they’ll put the charge more up.
Interviewer: And will there be any changes like for example environmental or anything like that?
Participant: I don’t think so, I think it’ll be the same but the bag will be a lot dearer.
Interviewer: And why do you think it will not change?
Participant: Because they’ve been trying to do it with drink and food as well, they put the prices up and it’s just stayed the same, and I think it’s just going to stay the same with bags, they’re just going to put the prices up.
Interviewer: So people will not change, yeah?
Participant: No, people won’t change.
Interviewer: But, well you said that you yourself changed, right, in the beginning when the charge was introduced you started to take less bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, but you think that other people will not really change, yeah, or will they change?
Participant: I don’t think they will change, I think it’ll just stay the same.
Interviewer: Alright, next question I wanted to ask you is like a different set of questions we’re moving kind of towards the last part of the interview, do you save water and energy at home?
Participant: I think so.
Interviewer: Well let’s speak about energy, things like gas and electricity yeah, what kind of those, how do you try and save it yourself personally?
Participant: By turning off all the switches in my room.
Interviewer: And is it something that happens to you kind of as a habit or do you need to remember about it?
Participant: At first I had to remember but after a while it’s just became a habit.
Interviewer: So you just do it all the time, yeah, would you say?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the household waste?
Participant: I recycle it.
Interviewer: And what do you recycle in particular?
Participant: Paper, plastic bottles, empty cans.
Interviewer: And what do you think about recycling you know, facilities that you have at home?
Participant: I think it’s working.
Interviewer: It’s working, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what kind of bins do you have, I mean provided by the Council?
Participant: A blue bin, a normal bin and a red bin.
Interviewer: So the blue is for paper or is it for…
Participant: It’s for paper and plastic.
Interviewer: Oh like solid recycling, yeah.
Participant: All recycle, yeah.
Interviewer: And then?
Participant: The normal bin is just for normal like for food.
Interviewer: General waste, yeah, and a third one you mentioned?
Participant: I don’t know what the red one’s for, I think it’s for glass, we don’t really use that one.
Interviewer: I see, and why would you say you recycle?
Participant: It’s just a force of habit now.
Interviewer: Just a habit, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Have your parents sort of you know, spoke to you about it, that you have to recycle and things like that, or not?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do they recycle?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and the next question I wanted to ask you about, what dos environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Healthy and clean, save the planet, that’s about it.
Interviewer: And what kind of behaviours you think, would you say are environmentally friendly, like what examples could you give?
Participant: Recycling, that’s the only thing I can think of, recycling.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: In-between, I don’t really get into stuff like that.
Interviewer: When you say kind of in-between can you a little be, yeah, can you a little bit explain, so probably some part of it are not very important you but some are, so what would you say is important about it and what is you know?
Participant: It’s important, it’s just trying to keep the earth clean, and it’s just a force of habit doing the recycling because I’ve been doing it for over a year now, that’s all I can think of.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I’m not really, I don’t really think about that.
Interviewer: And what does environment mean to you also?
Participant: What does what mean?
Interviewer: Environment.
Participant: Environment, clean and healthy.
Interviewer: And compared to you know, other issues in today’s world, things like social you know, issues, economy, health, how important the environment is to you?
Participant: Important, just not as much.
Interviewer: So which of those would be more important than the environment?
Participant: Health.
Interviewer: Health, yeah, but you also mentioned the connection between health and environment, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Can you speak a little bit about this because it doesn’t come up very often in our interviews so I’d be interested to hear a little bit?
Participant: It’s just people trying to be healthy, trying to keep their selves clean.
Interviewer: So clan environment basically means good health, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And is there anything in your area where you live that makes you think about these questions?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Would you say it’s a good and clean area that you live in?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, and do you feel that you know enough about environmental you know, issues, or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And would you say that you would be interested in you know, kind of learning more about it, or not necessarily?
Participant: Yeah, I would be into learning more about it.
Interviewer: And what kind of things do you think should be you know, like highlighted for people?
Participant: Recycling, and health.
Interviewer: And what kind of things you know, what kind of support would you say people would ned from the like government or environmental organisations, sort of parties like that, to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: The government.
Interviewer: So what could the government do for people to help them be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: Give more support about it and then they give you information.
Interviewer: Do you find that there is enough information nowadays about environment, or not?
Participant: There’s not.
Interviewer: Okay, and just the last question I wanted to ask you about is are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And why would you say that you are happy with what you are doing?
Participant: Just in a routine of keeping healthy, and recycling.
Interviewer: What kinds of things would you say that you do for the environment?
Participant: Recycle, and well, not me but my parents, them with the bags.
Interviewer: Okay, and about your neighbourhood I just wanted to ask as the last question, is it, what kind of things do you like about your neighbourhood and what kind of things do you find are a bit of a problem?
Participant: Well, quiet for the two of them, that’s it, it’s just quiet.
Interviewer: And what is it in the neighbourhood that you would change or you know, do you think is not as good?
Participant: I don’t think I’d change anything.
Interviewer: Great, thank you very much. Is there anything that you would like you know, at the end to emphasise or to add?
Participant: No, that’s all.
Interviewer: Great, thank you very much.