Interviewer: Thank you very much for taking part in the diary study, so we just have an hour to speak first of all about your experiences of the diary study and then to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary, so there are no good or bad answers, we just want to know your honest opinion.
Participant: Yeah, that’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay, do you have any questions before we start?
Participant: No, no, that’s fine, I’m ready to go ahead with that.
Interviewer: Okay, so could you tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was easy, it was no bother to do it, it only took 5, 10 minutes to do each night you know? I found it pretty easy to do, it was good.
Interviewer: And was there anything quite tedious to write down?
Participant: Not necessarily at all, no. My routine, my daily routine’s quite straightforward anyway you know, so I didn’t find it hard at all.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t say anything surprised me, no.
Interviewer: Okay, could you please describe your typical food shopping trip, so sort of how often you go, where you go, how you get there, things like that?
Participant: I don’t really go shopping that often to be honest with you, I’ll probably go shopping probably every say roughly 2 weeks, what I’ll do is I’ll drive up to the local Asda, which is about, say it’s around about 14 miles away, so yeah, I would drive up there and I normally get quite a big shop which does me for roughly around 2 weeks, that’s normally the way I’d do it you know, obviously just for my daily essentials, milk, stiff like that you know, I would just pop round to the local shop and get that stuff, you know?
Interviewer: Is that like a corner shop, your local shop?
Participant: Yeah, aye, I’ve just got a wee corner shop just round the corner basically.
Interviewer: Okay, is there any reason why you like to shop at Asda?
Participant: Probably just because of the price difference to be honest with you, it’s just that little bit cheaper I feel you know, normally, sometimes I’ll shop at a different supermarket but most of the time it’ll be Asda you know, most of the time it’s Asda. For instance Asda’s own make eggs I think for the price you’re paying for them they’re better than another own branded eggs like for instance Tesco’s, Morrison’s and that, they’re really good eggs and they’re cheaper you know, so that’s what I do.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, do you take a list with you?
Participant: Do I take a list with me? Sometimes, sometimes I would do, if I’m organised that day I will because obviously when I’m going to do a shop I’ll get quite a lot of stuff you know, most of the time though I kind of follow quite a strict diet you know, I kind of, I eat the same kind of foods pretty often, most of the days I’m easting the same food, the same meals, I don’t really stray, I like to stay in shape so I’ve got quite a good understanding of nutrition and stuff like that so most of the time I’ll follow a kind of set, a set meal plan so to speak so I know what I’m getting when I go shopping, you know?
Interviewer: Okay, and do you tend to go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Most of the time I’ll go myself to be honest with you, the odd occasion I’ll maybe go with my brother but that’s, most of the time I prefer to do it myself because I can concentrate, when I’m with somebody they start trying to get stuff and I forget what I’m going for and all that, so I’ll just go myself.
Interviewer: Do you know roughly how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: How much of my food goes to waste? Let me think, not a lot to be honest with you, I’m pretty careful with that, food going to waste, a lot of the time when I get a loaf of bread I won’t eat the two outsiders so that’s waste you know what I mean, but for instance all my fruit and stuff like that, my vegetables that I buy I never really fling stuff out you know, I’ll use everything, for instance if I look in my fridge and I see that I’ve got some vegetables that are kind of maybe 1 or 2 days left in them, I’ll use them you know, I won’t, I try not to fling anything out to be honest with you.
Interviewer: Could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Five words when I think of supermarket plastic bags?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: That’s quite tricky. Well obviously 5p, a lot of, because I’ve got a lot of them in my house, recyclable, I’m not really sure to be honest with you, recyclable, plastic, because they’re plastic, environment, and a good cause I like, me personally, everybody moans about whole whole 5p think, I like it, I think it’s a good thing, you know?
Interviewer: What, the charge on the bags?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s a good thing for the simple fact, you know what I mean, it’s going to make people think, “I can’t be bothered paying 5p every time for a bag, so instead of me taking them home and binning them, I’ll keep them, reuse them, so I don’t get charged 5p”, you know?
Interviewer: And do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: I’ve no idea, I’ve no idea, I was obviously very young at the time, I think they’ve probably been about since I was born, I’m 25, I was born in 1990 so they’re probably, do you know when the plastic bag was invented, it’s been about for a while hasn’t it?
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: It’s been about for quite a while the plastic bag I would imagine.
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m not sure to be honest.
Participant: I’m pretty sure they were kicking about in 1990 and that you know what I mean, I couldn’t tell you the first time I came across a plastic bag.
Interviewer: Okay, and what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: Well most of the time I just use a bag for life you know, the ones you get from Asda that are a bit more heavy duty, I would just take them with me, reuse, reuse them too.
Interviewer: And is that something you do automatically without thinking?
Participant: Aye, I always do, well obviously I’ve got to think about it you know, because obviously I’ve got to remember to put them in the car and stuff like that, there has been, there has been a couple of times where I’ve forgot, things have been going on, it’s just not you know, I’ve forgot about, but most of the time I’ll remember to do it you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because obviously they’re a bit more durable, they’re a bit more durable than the 5p bags and you should be reusing them, so instead of buying, instead of going to the shop every time you go to the supermarket you’re taking maybe 7, 8, 10 bags home with you, binning them, and then you know, that’s just a process every time, you just buy 10 bags and reuse them and then if they, for instance the bag falls to bit or whatever, you get a tear in it, they replace it so you never need to, you just, you don’t need to buy your bags know what I mean, you just, that’s it, you buy them once and then that’s you, you own one for life.
Interviewer: So what do you think is good about bags for life versus not so good about them?
Participant: I don’t think there’s anything bad about them at all to be honest with you, I think it’s a good thing, I can’t say anything negative about them to be honest with you. The only thing I could say negative about them is that for instance say somebody, because a lot of folks when they go to the supermarket they’ll get bags for life, they don’t want to get the cheaper bags because a lot of the time they’ll burst and that, they’re not exactly durable, bags for life are a bit more tough and when you think about it they’re probably a bit more hard to break down, a lot of folk get bags for life and they bin them when they go home, they just buy them, know what I mean, so I can imagine them taking a bit longer to break down you know, apart from that, I don’t know what else is bad about them.
Interviewer: So… sorry, carry on.
Participant: No, that’s me.
Interviewer: Okay, so you prefer them to the single use plastic bags because they’re more durable?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you prefer taking bags for life rather than like your own bags, so say like a rucksack or something?
Participant: Well, I don’t really have any bags in my house like that to take you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: That’s why, so I’d just rather take the bags for life because I’ve got them, I take them and I reuse them, I don’t have, I’m not going to take 5 or 6 rucksacks into the supermarket with me you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and where do you store the bags that you take with you when you go food shopping?
Participant: Where do I put them when I’m going round shopping, or where do I keep them in my house?
Interviewer: You keep them in your house.
Participant: I’ve got them all in one of the bags, so I’ve got a bag of bags at the side of my fridge, I’ve got a wee kind of hanger and I just keep them there.
Interviewer: Okay, and then when you go shopping you put them into your car?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: It’s majorly important because most of the people that are going shopping they are, they get far too much food for them to carry you know, so you need to be able to bag it up, if you don’t have your own bags that is.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags complete disappeared from shops, how do you think you would find that?
Participant: It’d be fine because the simple fact is if that was the case we would just have to work around it, you have to get your own bags, you would just buy a couple of kind of durable bags, buy maybe 10 bags, keep them in the car, take them with you shopping and that would be it, that’s, folk would just have to do it, it’d be fine, it’d be better.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you ever use plastic bags as bin liners?
Participant: No, no, never.
Interviewer: How many plastic bags do you think roughly you currently have at home?
Participant: Probably about 20, I’d say 20.
Interviewer: Are they all bags for life?
Participant: Not all bags for life, some, some from different shops, some of the cheaper ones, why I’ve got them I don’t know because I just don’t use them, they’re just in the bag of bags.
Interviewer: And obviously you take them with you when you go shopping, and do you use them for anything else?
Participant: No, I never use them for anything else, no.
Interviewer: Okay. So you know what the plastic bag charge is then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: The 5p charge, can you remember what context you were in or like basically where you heard about the charge for the first time?
Participant: I would have been in the Isle of Skye, I used to stay on the Isle of Skye and I remember, I used to actually work at the Co-op, I used to work in the Co-op Isle of Skye and I remember folk were talking about it and that, and that’s obviously when I first kind of heard about it, they were going to start charging for bags, I remember there was a big uproar about it, folk weren’t too happy about it you know?
Interviewer: Did you find the introduction of the charge surprising?
Participant: No, I didn’t find it surprising at all, to me instantly, as soon as I heard I was like, “that’s a good thing”, for the simple fact that it’ll make people reuse the bags instead of dumping them you know?
Interviewer: And is there anything not so good about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, I’m not too sure where the money goes, I don’t know if it gets pumped back into the government or if it goes to, it should go into like the environment, know what I mean, like helping recycling and all that, but I’m not 100% sure where the money goes, that’s the only thing I’m not too sure about, you know?
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced into England in October?
Participant: Aye, that’s right, that’s right.
Interviewer: Do you know when and how you heard about that?
Participant: It wasn’t that long ago I heard about that, I was down in England a wee while ago, I was down in Penzance, down right at the bottom of England, I was down in this wee kind of village and I think really not long ago they were talking about it, I overheard somebody talking about it or something like that. I’ll be honest with you, I never knew, I thought England, I never knew it was a Scottish thing, I thought it was United Kingdom, I never knew it was just in Scotland.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, I would hope it’s obviously to protect the environment because of the amount of plastic bags that are wasted, that’s what I would hope it’s for, whether or not it’s a government scheme to create more money or gain money I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s kind of successful in doing that then, in helping the environment?
Participant: I would image in so, yeah, because I don’t know the statistics or the number or anything like that, but I would imagine that a lot of folk, yeah a lot of folk weren’t happy about it, I would imagine that a lot of people they stopped doing it, they stopped buying the bags and they just keep bags for life and reuse them, but you can imagine the amount of plastic bags that got wasted every day across Scotland, it’d be massive, on a weekly basis it’d be massive know what I mean, in these landfill sites and that, so.
Interviewer: Do you think the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affected you?
Participant: It didn’t affect me in any way to be honest with you.
Interviewer: It didn’t affect you?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t say it affected me in any way because I’ll be honest with you, before it came in I used my bags anyway you know?
Interviewer: Do you think it’s changed your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t say that at all.
Interviewer: Do you think you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person after the charge was introduced?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And did you notice any changes after the charge in your local area or in your country?
Participant: I’ve not, no, to be honest with you I’ve not seen anything different.
Interviewer: Okay, so what do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is being applied in your country?
Participant: I’m happy with it you know, it was quite a blunt thing, there wasn’t any, as far as I know, it was just this is what they’re doing and that’s it you know what I mean, so I was happy with it to be honest with you, I was fine with it.
Interviewer: And do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: What, sorry?
Interviewer: Bag reuse, do you think it’s encouraged enough in your country?
Participant: If it’s encouraged enough? I would say so for the simple fact that you have to buy them and for people that’s like, even though it’s 5p it’s folk are raging about it know what I mean, at having to buy their bags, but reuse them, that’s what I say, reuse your bags you know?
Interviewer: So you don’t think anything needs to be changed in that respect?
Participant: If it was me personally I think there should be a major, bigger charge to be honest with you, I think they should ban them or something, just kind of stop them, but then again when you think about it there’s so much other stuff getting pumped into the environment that’s destroying it, it’s just a teeny, it’s a minute step in bringing, making the environment a better place because at the end of the day it’s use that’s destroying the environment you know, from the plastic bottles, there’s so much gets pumped into the earth because of us, plastic bags are a minute, teeny percentage of it, so whether or not it’s making a massive difference, it’s not making, whether or not it’s making, it’ll be making a tiny difference but it’s all for the better though isn’t it?
Interviewer: So when a 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of bag and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: No, I don’t think that is fair at all to be honest with you. I don’t see why in Scotland it would be a case of across the board and then in England it’s not a case of across the board.
Interviewer: So do you think it should be the same in Scotland and in England?
Participant: Of course it should, aye, course it should.
Interviewer: And how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, for example congestion charge?
Participant: What’s a congestion charge again, sorry, is that the parking?
Interviewer: So in London if, you get charged for driving your car in busy, in really busy areas.
Participant: So you get charged for driving your car?
Interviewer: Yeah, in busy areas.
Participant: Right, I don’t know anything about that, I don’t know about that to be honest with you, I think all that kind of stuff’s shocking to be honest with you, that’s just the government trying to make a lot of money you know what I mean, and they do, they make Billions from doing all this kind of thing, parking tickets and all that and charging to park and congestion charges, it’s just, that’s all shocking to be honest with you.
Interviewer: So that’s different to the plastic bag charge, that’s more just the government trying to get money?
Participant: Aye, that’s just making money you know what I mean, it’s like, to be honest with you.
Interviewer: Yeah, what if they were you know, if they brought in a charge on plastic packaging individually wrapped vegetables or on plastic bottles, how would you feel about that?
Participant: Well the thing is you do get charged for that because you’re paying for it you know what I mean, you go and buy a bottle of water you’re paying money so there is a charge, at the end of the day you can turn your tap on and you get water that way, but if you’re buying a bottle in my eyes you’re already paying a charge for the plastic, you know what I mean, whereas with the bag that were free, now I think that’s different in a way because it’s that stuff you’re already paying for you know?
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: What’ll happen in 10 years’ time?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: Nothing at all to be honest with you, I don’t think it’s going to have any effect apart from people, the amount of bags, the number of bags that are being wasted will go down I would imagine, but that’ll be it, I don’t see it having any effect to the environment or that, there’s too much pollution and all the rest of it for it to make any effect I think.
Interviewer: Okay, do you save water at home?
Participant: Do I save water?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well, for instance when I boil the kettle for a cup of tea I never fill the kettle, I’ll half fill it, just have enough in the kettle for my cup of tea you know, I would say that’s, is that saving water, like that?
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: Would you say that’s saving water?
Interviewer: Yeah, so anything like that, so not having the tap running while you’re brushing your teeth for example, showers being short, having a water meter, anything really.
Participant: The only thing I really do to save water to be honest with you is, well when I do the dishes I’ll always do the dishes off a boiled kettle instead of running the hot water for the gas boiler to kick in and then heat it up that way, I’ll boil a kettle, whether or not I’m actually saving, well no I’m definitely saving water being doing that because for the simple fact for me to get my hot water through the tap I have to run the tap for a while for the boiler to kick in and to heat up the water, so aye, that’s saving as well.
Interviewer: So these things that you do do to save water, do you do them habit or do you have to plan or remember to do them?
Participant: By habit.
Interviewer: Okay, what about saving energy at home, do you do that?
Participant: Yeah, I’m very…
Interviewer: So you have examples?
Participant: Yeah, well for instance every time I leave a room I turn the light off, I like to try and keep things off at the wall that I don’t need on at all, a lot of the time when I go for a shower I’ll actually turn the whole shower, electric shower, up at the ceiling you pull the wee cord even though it’s maybe not making anything, the reason why I do all that is basically just to save on electricity, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, is that habit as well?
Participant: Aye, that’s habit, I don’t think about it.
Interviewer: So you save energy to save money, what about saving water, do you do that to save your eater bill, or?
Participant: No, I don’t do that to, I just do that through habit to be honest with you, I don’t, because to me it doesn’t really affect my water bill I don’t think you know, that I know of anyway, it maybe does, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And do you reuse anything at home?
Participant: Do I reuse anything, like?
Interviewer: Like jars for example, things like that?
Participant: I don’t really to be honest with you, no, I don’t, not jars, no, I don’t really reuse anything at all.
Interviewer: Okay, and when you’re doing your food shopping in a supermarket, do you tend to pay any attention to the packaging of the products?
Participant: No, I’m not bothered about how it’s packed to be honest with you, I don’t at all, no, to be honest with you.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you recycle household waste?
Participant: I do.
Interviewer: Do you have examples of what you recycle?
Participant: I’ll always recycle for instance my plastic bottles, i.e. my milk cartons, orange cartons, stuff like that, I’ll always put any kind of plastic stuff I would try and make sure goes into the blue bin.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well?
Participant: Yeah, that’s just a habit I just like doing that.
Interviewer: So do you have any reasons why you recycle or is it literally just a habit?
Participant: Well I feel as if, I’m that way I care about the environment in a way, at the end of the day I know me doing it isn’t going to make any difference really at the end of the day, the planet’s kind of on a downfall the way I look at it, the way humans are evolving so quickly and all that, it’s just, it’s going to be wrecked in about 100 years in my eyes, but I just feel if it makes any difference it’d be worth it because it’s no hassle off my back, it’s not, know what I mean, it’s easy.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Every day I would say.
Interviewer: And do you ever save up your car trips?
Participant: Do I what, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you tend to save your car trips?
Participant: Do I save them?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: What do you mean, like do I avoid unnecessary driving about?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Aye, I’ll not drive about if there’s no point in driving about.
Interviewer: Okay, and maybe if there were a few different places you needed to drive to but they were sort of nearby, would you do that all in one go rather than going separately?
Participant: It all depends on what I was doing but most of the time I’ll not just go out a drive or anything like that, or very rarely, I used to all the time, all the time I was always out in the car, I was a bit of a petrol head to be honest with you, so I was always flying about in the Subaru’s and all that but that was a while back so now I’ve calmed down I just you know, I’ll not waste fuel if you know what I mean?
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I do, now, now I do.
Interviewer: And why do you do that?
Participant: Well, I say now I do, I do now, I didn’t a couple of months ago because I had a different car a couple of months ago, but I got rid of that and I just got a wee economical car, so with the car I’ve got just now I do, just to save fuel, save money, make it go a bit further you know?
Interviewer: And is that a habit?
Participant: Driving in a fuel efficient way, it is, it is habit, aye, I do think about it, obviously you do need to think about it when you’re driving economically, you’ve got to think about how you’re driving and all that, I’m not that way, I wouldn’t try and, don’t drive, I try and not drive a slow car fast if you know what I mean, it’s stupid, what’s the point in that, so aye, if you drive a slow car drive it slow, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: I’m out on the bike most days to be honest with you, I do quite a wee bit of cycling, keep in shape and that, normally, it depends what you mean by short distances, normally I’ll cycle, the shortest I’ve ever cycles is probably about 8 miles you know?
Interviewer: Okay, so it’s more for fitness?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Eco-friendly cleaning products? I don’t, no.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you don’t buy them?
Participant: I don’t even know what an eco-friendly cleaning product is to be honest with you.
Interviewer: Okay, so you just haven’t really come across them then?
Participant: I’ve not, no, is it a kind of eco-friendly Fairy Liquid, is that like?
Interviewer: I’m not sure about Fairy Liquid but just like kitchen cleaner and bleach, well, not bleach, I don’t know, just like general cleaning sprays.
Participant: Right, I’ve not came across anything that’s eco-friendly, no.
Interviewer: What about organic food, do you ever buy organic food?
Participant: Organic food? Not a lot to be honest with you, just for the simple fact I’m always on a very, very tight budget, I’ve not got a lot of money so that’s the only fact, if I had the money to spend on it I would because it’s always better, most of the time, not always but most of the time I would get that you know?
Interviewer: What about sustainable foods, so foods that go towards sustaining animal welfare or forests or fisheries?
Participant: To be honest with you I don’t really pay attention to anything like that. Again, when it comes to food and all that, I just normally buy the same food, with me food it’s all to do with the price of it to be honest with you, you know?
Interviewer: Do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: Aye, well you could say I do, the National Trust, it’s like Culzean Castle and that, I’ve got a wee thing there, we go out with the kids, my brother’s kids and they’ve created this new park, it’s amazing, and it’s a charity so basically we had to join up, it’s a monthly thing, we pay I think it was £6 a month or something like that, basically the money’s just getting pumped back into the charity so they can build more stuff and all that really you know?
Interviewer: Okay, what do you support the National Trust then?
Participant: Because it’s a good thing, it’s in Scotland, it’s keeping, it’s good for the kids to be honest with you, you know?
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we’ve just talked about like saving water and energy and recycling and things like that, your driving, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: I wouldn’t say so to be honest with you because I do all this stuff anyway, I never changed anything for the diary if you know what I mean, I just done what I do, and in a way I’m sort of conscious of it anyway because I’m doing it, but no, I wouldn’t say so.
Interviewer: And what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well for instance things like pouring litter in, you know what I mean, folk littering and stuff like that, it’s shocking, small things like that to me mean a lot. I always say that a lot of it does have to do with recycling, if you put in the effort just to put your plastic bottles into the blue bin, stuff like that, it’s wee things, I would say.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: I don’t know if I would say I’m concerned about it, I just feel it’s sad to be honest with you because I love nature, I go a lot of hillwalking and stuff like that you know what I mean, I love outdoors, I absolutely love it, and I think it’s terrible that the human race is destroying the earth and the way things are progressing over the past 100 years in the next 100 years, 200 years I think it’s just going to get worse and worse and worse until they start inventing kind of technology to kind of counteract it, ways to dispose of things, wind turbines and things like that, aye, it’s a constant, for me it’s not a worry because at the end of the day it’s not really going to affect my life I feel, you know, but I do think about it in a way but I don’t spend hours worrying about it because what’s the point, there’s nothing I can do about it, it’s just the times we live in isn’t it?
Interviewer: Are there any specific environmental issues that you’re concerned about?
Participant: Well, not necessarily, no, not necessarily.
Interviewer: And what does the environment mean to you, is it an important part of your identity or your life?
Participant: It is because I’m from Scotland and I used to stay up in the Isle of Skye, for me the Highlands and that are absolutely beautiful, and what I love about up North and that is because it’s very untouched, it’s a natural beauty, I was saying this to my mother, we lived down in Penzance and all that, down, I don’t know if you’ve ever been down in that neck of the woods, but it’s absolutely beautiful but down Devon and that it’s really, really nice but for me it just looks all manmade, everything’s made to look pretty you know what I mean, all the thatched roofs, all the way the fields are kept, it’s all made to look like that, which is nice, but up North in Scotland it’s just beautiful, it’s not been touched, it’s just the landscapes you know what I mean, everything’s better up there, the air’s fresher, everything, it’s, you know what I mean, so aye.
Interviewer: And you think the environment’s an important part of your identity, or not?
Participant: Yeah, I would say it is an important part of my identity, aye.
Interviewer: Why do you think it is an important part of your identity?
Participant: Like I said, because I’m Scottish and I’m out in the environment all the time, I’m out cycling, mountain biking, hillwalking and all that, I’m always involved in the environment if you know what I mean in my spare time, if you know what I mean, was that kind of what you’re coming at there?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: Aye, I’d say I am involved in it.
Interviewer: Okay, and how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I wouldn’t say I’m concerned at all to be honest with you, I try and create very little, as little as I can.
Interviewer: What about recyclable waste?
Participant: Recyclable waste I would normally try and recycle you know, the only thing I don’t recycle is like see for instance if I’ve got food waste, you’re supposed to put it in its own wee bin and all that, I don’t do that, I just put it in the normal bin, at the end of the day it’s food, it breaks down really quickly, and goes back into the earth and stuff like that where plastic bags it’s a different thing.
Interviewer: So you’re not too concerned really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society such as social, economic or health issues, how important, if at all, are the environmental issues to you?
Participant: Well compared to the rest of the issues I think it’s drastically important because without the environment I mean we’ve nothing at the end of the day, the environment’s very important, to sustain the environmental because at the end of the day that’s where we live.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s possibly more important than these other issues?
Participant: Aye, I do actually to be honest with you, it’s more important than a lot of issues because the simple fact is if the environment falls to bits all the other issues aren’t going to exist or they’re not going to be important because you know what I mean, the environment’s a very important thing, it’s the most important thing to be honest with you, I would say.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Do I feel as if I know enough about it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Not at all you know what I mean, it’s funny you say that, I was just literally before you phoned, I was looking at Open University, I’m thinking about doing an Open University course, I’m not 100% sure, I’m just looking just now, but there’s so much to learn about it, I know nothing to be honest with you, all that I know is from the wee amount that’s involved in my life, which is nothing, it’s a very important thing you know, I could learn a lot more about it, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so do you think you’d like to improve the amount of knowledge that you have about the environment?
Participant: I do, I do think that.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I do feel that I do, at the end of the day I’ve just got the same amount of skills as everybody else has got to, all I have to do is hone those skills and craft them into the, direct them into the proper direction to make a difference, I mean anybody can do it, they just need to put their mind to it.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly, or not?
Participant: Well, it’s a personal choice at the end of the day, if you want to be environmentally friendly you will, if you don’t you won’t, you know what I mean, there’s plenty of information out there, put it this way, there’s Google, if you want to find something out you can on to that and find anything out, you know?
Interviewer: So you feel like you receive enough support from the government and environmental organisations?
Participant: Aye, I would say so.
Interviewer: Do you think that there’s enough communication on environmental issues?
Participant: Well it’s not something you really see every day, you don’t really hear about it or anything like that, know what I mean, it’s not like you turn on the news and it’s all environmental issues, it’s the normal crap that’s in the news, it’s actually, I feel as if they keep it kind of quiet in a way, I don’t know why, as if folk are kind of sick of hearing about it and all that, I don’t know, you know, I think their priorities are wrong.
Interviewer: In what way do you think that?
Participant: I think that the government and that, they’re more caught up in other things that I feel aren’t as important as the environment you know?
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think about the legislation and regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: I don’t even, I don’t know what that is to be honest with you, I don’t know what that is.
Interviewer: So just sort of how they’re looking after the environments around you, do you think they’re doing a good job?
Participant: I do, I think Scotland’s, I think Scotland tries to take care of Scotland to be honest with you, especially up North and that, like up North, like for instance I moved, I’m not from the Isle of Skye, I’m from Ayrshire, it’s fair to say Ayrshire’s a dump, it’s a crap place to stay but when I moved to the Isle of Skye there wasn’t such a thing as litter at the side of the road, it’d taken me ages to realise how clean the environment was up there know what I mean, down here it’s a dump, a shite hole you know, everywhere you go there’s just balls of shit everywhere, you know what I mean, it’s horrible, folk don’t care where I stay, which is a shame, it’s a shame that folk are like that but they’ve totally just become a product of their own environment I suppose and it’s, to me I think it’s shocking, I mean you make a choice you know, you either be like that or you’re not you know? But up North and that it’s, you can see people really do care about the environment up there, where I stay just now you feel as if nobody gives two tosses to be honest with you.
Interviewer: So do you think there’s anything else that could or should be done?
Participant: I feel there’s a lot that should be done, but whether or not people would do it, that’s the thing you know what I mean, there’s so many things people can do to try and just, but it’s the people’s mentalities that you have to try and change and that’s a losing battle I think.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely, and you are happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment, or not?
Participant: Well I feel as if I’m doing my part, I’m not doing it for anybody else, you know what I mean, I’m just, it’s not as I got, put it this way I don’t talk about the environment with anybody or anything like that you know what I mean, it’s not something I would ever really talk about, but in myself think about it in a weird way, just from time-to-time if you know what I mean, it’s not as I think about the environment all the time but it’s like it’s not as if I’ll say t folk, “Oh by the way, I was recycling today, I hope you’re recycling”, or anything like, it’s just, it’s a natural thing I do.
Interviewer: Are there any behaviours in this area that you’re not so happy with?
Participant: In the recycling areas?
Interviewer: Environmental behaviours.
Participant: Environmental behaviours?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Again it comes down to the people at the end of the day, I’m not happy with the way the people think know what I mean, the environment’s there, it’s always going to be there, it’s the people that need to change and realise that they stay in the environment and they’re destroying it, they’re abusing it, and that’s got to turn at some point, maybe not in the next 100,000 years or the next 100 years, you don’t know yet, I don’t know, but it will get to a point where pollution just gets out of hand, do you know what I mean, but I’m saying that, you never know, in 100 years the place might be so bad that they create this new way to reverse it or to get rid of pollution an eco-way and all that, they’re already kind of coming up with things like that you know, so I don’t know.
Interviewer: Would you like to change anything in your environmental behaviours?
Participant: I wouldn’t say so to be honest with you, I think I do my part alright, know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, and what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: Nobody cares, that’s the main problem, and nobody cares.
Interviewer: No what, sorry?
Participant: Nobody cares.
Interviewer: Nobody cares?
Participant: Obviously there’s folk that care but the majority of people I would say, don’t, they’re wrapped up in their own worries, in their own life to give two tosses about the environment, most folk, not everybody, I mean obviously not but a fair share, I would say probably the majority.
Interviewer: Oh okay, they don’t care about the environment?
Participant: I’m probably totally wrong saying that, you know what I mean, but it’s just the way I feel you know, it’s just, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Okay, and everything we’ve just talked about during this interview, is there anything you want to add or emphasise?
Participant: I wouldn’t say so, no, what’s the study for, that’s something I would to bring up, what’s this study actually for, what are you going to do with all the information you’re gathering?
Interviewer: Well we’re social scientists at Cardiff University…
Participant: You’re social what?
Interviewer: Scientists.
Participant: You’re social scientists?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: So we’re just sort of interested in people’s behaviours, I don’t really want to give away too much in case you want to take part in the second phase?
Participant: Right, yeah, no, that’s fine.
Interviewer: I mean you will find out all the details at the very end anyway, but yeah, like I said I don’t want to give away too much.
Participant: No, no, that’s absolutely fine, I understand.
Interviewer: The research is academic, it’s not for marketing or…
Participant: Right, I see, it’s a study.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: That’s cool.
Interviewer: Speaking of the second phase, that’s starting in November, it’s very similar, filling out a diary, and there’s a slightly higher payment, it’s £70 for the study so do you think you’d be interested in participating in that?
Participant: I’d definitely take part in that.
Interviewer: Okay, great, okay well that’s pretty much everything I just need to ask you some demographic questions quickly and then we’re done.