Interviewer: As I said you know, one of the first things I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary overall, how was that experience?
Participant: Initially it was good, but I did find the questions a bit repetitive and the first question or the second question, so the first question, “did you buy anything today?”, I think it was, along those lines, the second one, “did anybody else in the household?”, and then the third question was referring to the last question, and I just wasn’t clear if it meant about me or the other people but I’m assuming it meant the last question which was about the other person so I’ve just…
Interviewer: The other people, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, we did realise this kind of in the beginning but we couldn’t change the, we could have changed but then we would have lost some of the information potentially so we just kept it , it’s fine, it’s okay.
Participant: Yeah, and then the last tick box at the end I found, obviously found myself ticking the same box each time, which was a bit you know, again a bit repetitive, I thought…
Interviewer: What was it about, sorry?
Participant: The box at the end where you tick the box about did you drive in an economical way and did you switch taps off and things like that, because you kind of do the same things each day, yeah, it was a little bit, I just, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you for that feedback. And what did you find easy to do and what did you like about it?
Participant: Well I found the recycling bit a little bit confusing, I suppose I really should have asked the question earlier, I wasn’t, I couldn’t decide if recycling meant did I recycle as in did I put the paper and cardboard in the recycling bin, that way, or did I reuse the articles, so did I reuse the paper to, for scrap paper or, do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yes, yes, the word recycling. yeah, indeed it has two meanings.
Participant: Yeah, so I decided, I suppose I should have asked but I decided that I’d recycled as in putting them in the correct bins so that when they went back to…
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s what we meant actually.
Participant: Oh okay, that’s fine then, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, not to worry, in both cases it would have been both of the responses would have interested us, so it’s absolutely fine, yeah.
Participant: Okay, good.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: Well I was, it was a strange week for me to start the diary because I work in a school so we’d been on 6 weeks holiday and it was my first week back at school, normally I’m really, really organised so I plan my menus, I, based around ordering online so click and collect or delivery, and I plan my menu based on what’s on offer that week, so I look at the meat section, find out what meat’s on offer and then look for a recipe to match it and that’s how I do my, I do it like that all the time, however having had 6 weeks off and children in and out the house and the routine different I didn’t do that last week, I just, I literally was buying from day-to-day so I was quite surprised how much more I spent.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, so just about the amount spent?
Participant: Yeah, amount spent and just the routine of actually being at, I think I went to the shops every single day, apart from yesterday.
Interviewer: I see, which is not your usual?
Participant: No, normally I’ll do one shop online and then just top-up occasionally.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, well this is actually what we were moving towards, this was the question that I was going to ask you, how does your typical food shop trip look like, if you could describe it?
Participant: A food trip?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Normally just picking it up from the click and collect, so ordering online for the next day and then driving by, picking it up from the pick-up because it’s free, so delivery, you can’t always get a slot that’s suitable and you generally have to pay, so currently the supermarket I use is free.
Interviewer: And which supermarket do you use?
Participant: Tesco.
Interviewer: Tesco, and why do you find it more convenient to do this online and then to come to the shop and pick it up?
Participant: Because ordering online means I’ve got control over what I’m buying so like I say I can plan my menus, I can sit at home on a Friday evening, decide who’s around the next week to eat, and like I say look at what’s on offer and look at, they’ve got recipes online so I use their recipes or I go on another website and I sort of tailor it round there, yeah, that’s why I do that.
Interviewer: Right, and then you said also there are some top-up shopping as…
Participant: Yeah, milk normally, bits and bobs for the kids or if something, if I’ve forgotten something, often actually what happens is I’ll go and pick my shopping up and on the way to pick it up I remember I forgot to order something, so I end up going in just briefly anyway, but that happens quite a lot but it’s just one of those you know, you can’t remember everything, and I do the click and collect as well because I find that that’s picked by the people in the shop, so they pick the click and collect food, if you order a delivery it comes from a warehouse, so I’ve done it a couple of times and I’ve noticed the quality of the picking is not as good as if it was in the shop, and often they have stuff in, the fresh food in the warehouse is not as either good or they don’t have the same items available as they do in the shop.
Interviewer: Sure, okay, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Literally by looking at recipes, so deciding what we’re going to have, not particularly on each day but I might order, decide on 5 different recipes or 6 different recipes depending on how many days I’m cooking for that week, and like I say I’ll look on, first thing I do is look on what’s on offer in the meat or fish section and then base if for example lamb is on offer I will look for a lamb recipe and then just…
Interviewer: So it can be one way or the other way round?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: So it can be recipe to food or food to recipes sort of?
Participant: It tends to be recipe to food so I decide what we fancy or what’s on offer and then I’ll look for a recipe.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you choose food and what is less important?
Participant: Mainly important is the quality of the food, I’ve noticed that you can, that if you look at the special offers that are on the shelf, so the packaged meat for example, it looks like a really good deal, but if you look at the butcher’s counter, the fresh meat counter often they’ve got just as good offers and the meat, for example like free range chicken can be cheaper from the butcher’s counter than it is on the shelf pre-packaged and it’s better quality.
Interviewer: And do you have that option when you buy click and collect?
Participant: Yes, you can look at counters, so I always look at the counters first, so butcher’s counter, cheese counter, fish counter, and then I’ll look what’s on the shelves which are pre-packed, inevitably as a rule I normally end up buying from the butcher’s counter.
Interviewer: And how long have you been using click and collect?
Participant: About 18 months, 2 years, about 18 months, yeah.
Interviewer: And before was it just a regular weekly trip to the supermarket?
Participant: Well before the children were a bit younger and they wouldn’t really try new recipes and things like that so I’d just go to the shop and probably twice a week and do sort of like half a shop each week and it’d be easy stuff, I wouldn’t have to really think about it, pasta, that type of thing, but as the children have got older and more adventurous I’ve been able to experiment more.
Interviewer: And how do you travel usually to the store?
Participant: Always by car.
Interviewer: Is it a long journey?
Participant: No, it probably takes me about 6 or 7 minutes.
Interviewer: But then the amount of things that you’re bringing back is quite…
Participant: A lot, yeah.
Interviewer: …quite a lot, yeah, is that the reason why you use the car?
Participant: It’s quite a long walk if you…
Interviewer: Is it?
Participant: Yeah, and down a sort of dual carriageway so busy traffic and you wouldn’t be able to carry it back.
Interviewer: Do you go food shopping on your own or with someone?
Participant: I try to go on my own because, well my husband’s always working, he’s busy so, and my daughter, if I take my daughter you can expect the bill to be at least £20 more because she’s 14 so the make-up section because they sell everything she’ll want more toiletries, she’ll want the best face cream, she’ll want the best hair product whereas if I’m buying I’ll just buy what’s on offer.
Interviewer: Okay, and does your daughter help you to buy things, does she go with you?
Participant: She’s quite good and she’s quite good at looking for bargains for food shopping, so if I pick something up she’s quite good at saying to me, “oh no, that’s not the best deal at the moment, try this”, or when it comes to the household stuff, but personally for her she’ll always choose the most expensive.
Interviewer: And is there any food that goes to waste in your household?
Participant: I’m afraid so, yes.
Interviewer: And what kind of, if we spoke about it what sort of waste?
Participant: We throw, mainly I’ll buy some convenience foods, my son works shifts, he’s 20 and so he’s at home a lot during the day and not around a lot at mealtimes, so I’ll buy things like pizza or pasta or a ready meal or something quick for him to make because he’s not a very good cook, but I notice by the end of the week there could be 2 or 3 items that he’s not used because he’s either eaten at work or ordered a you know, a take-away, so I end up throwing it away.
Interviewer: And is that the only kind of waste sort of?
Participant: Let me think now, I suppose vegetables that I plan to use in a recipe and you don’t need all of them so some of them might be pre-packaged so you don’t have the control over how many you order, and you don’t need them all so you leave them in the fridge and think I’ll use them again and then just don’t get round to it.
Interviewer: Is there anything else about shopping, food shopping that you probably wanted to mention or?
Participant: Just how expensive, it’s very expensive currently, very expensive.
Interviewer: Has it become more expensive?
Participant: Absolutely, yes.
Interviewer: You mean the food prices in the supermarkets, yeah?
Participant: Well I can’t decide if I’m spending more because I’m buying, like cooking from scratch every day so you’re buying your herbs, your vegetables, you might need a special ingredient, or whether prices are actually just going up I think there’s certain things that always stand out as being really expensive and you know, like a pepper, a red pepper, a green pepper for example, they’re quite expensive, they can be like 70p each, so it’s just little things like that I notice that stand out as being more expensive.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much. The next thing I’m going to ask you is slightly unusual, if you could tell me a few words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag, what sort of thing does it make you think of?
Participant: Supermarket plastic bags?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: At the moment now I’ve literally just looked at an email from Tesco reminding me that after the 5th of October, I’m aware that they’re going to be charged for and personally the cost of it is not an issue, it’s not an issue, I’m not worried about paying 5p for a bag, but I’m more conscious of the environmental reasons for them doing it, they’re not doing it to make money because I know the money’s going to go local charities or other charities or local causes, it’s more I need to think about actually there is a reason they’re doing it and that I should think about that a bit more because I’m never, I’ve not been very good, I buy all the bags so I’ve had them over the years but they just you know, the bags for life, and then they just sit in the cupboard and then I just go to the shop again and I have no bags with me and it’s just a never ending, but I know I’m going to have to try and get, because once you’ve brought your shopping in and unpacked it, remembering to take the bags bag out to the car for the next time because you could you know, at the moment I’m popping in every day, so yeah.
Interviewer: And well apart from that charge what does it make you think of, supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Well I’ve noticed over the last few months they’re getting, they’re less sturdy firstly anyway, so they’re kind of like not very good anyway, I’ve noticed that, so you can’t really carry anything heavy in them and I think it feels like they’ve tried to put you off using them by making them really flimsy, but I’m not sure if that is the reason but other than that I haven’t really given it much thought to be honest.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine.
Participant: I am aware that they take a long time to, well they don’t, what’s the word?
Interviewer: Biodegrade?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember that point in your life when you came across a supermarket plastic bag for the first time?
Participant: Supermarket?
Interviewer: Plastic bag.
Participant: Plastic bags?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Sorry, I can’t hear you, I’ve not got a very good…
Interviewer: Yeah, basically yeah, when you came across plastic bags for the first time in your life, do you remember that?
Participant: I don’t think, I don’t, I remember as a child you didn’t have them so, but then you’d be going into individual shops, the greengrocers, and they’d always wrap it in newspaper like your potatoes, they’d weight them and wrap them in paper, old newspapers, and then I remember bags being, you had to pay for them initially, so you paid, so you didn’t use them because you didn’t want to pay for them, I don’t remember when exactly, and then it just feels that over the last I’d say 10 years they’ve just been, it was like the supermarkets were happy to give them to you to make your experience easier.
Interviewer: And then they became free?
Participant: Yeah, and then they became free, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, thank you, and what sort of, we touched upon this already, but what sort of bags, containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: Well as a rule just the single use bags.
Interviewer: So when you basically do that click and collect is that all bagged already?
Participant: It’s all bagged because, and the reason for that I don’t mind if it wasn’t bagged but when you checkout online on the website that option is already ticked for you so you don’t really give it much thought, it doesn’t give you the option to think about it, you don’t have to because it’s just there.
Interviewer: Right, but you can untick if you…
Participant: You can untick it, there’s two options, with bags or without bags, but the with bags is always ticked and I just really don’t give it any thought, obviously I will now.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Because they do now, you could, you have different coloured bags when you pick up so you get a lot more bags, because you’ve got your normal shop in a bag and then you’ve got a yellow bag for something that may have, the date on it is not particularly long so if you, things like ham, it might be out of date in like 3 days and they’re concerned that you wouldn’t, so it’s just, so the person that gives you the shopping knows to show it to you and say, “is that date okay?”, so that’s a yellow bag, and then the green bag for frozen stuff and then they were using paper bags for vegetables but they haven’t used that for quite a while, so they started using, like your vegetables would be in a paper bag and then that disappeared.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to use any other types of bags, I don’t know, bags for life or some of your own bags that you…
Participant: No, I don’t, I really don’t give it much thought to be honest.
Interviewer: That’s fine, so it’s basically always the same, yeah?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Okay, and if I can ask you about bag for life, why do you think it has been given this name?
Participant: Well, another supermarket which I go to if I’m going from work, Waitrose, they will replace it if it gets broken or damaged for free, so I bought one there the other day because I saw them up there and I’d obviously been doing the survey so it was on my mind and I saw them, but they weren’t advertised and they weren’t offered and they were only 80p and then she said to me, “yeah, if it breaks or anything like that we’ll replace it free of charge”, maybe that’s why it’s called bag for life, I don’t know about other stores.
Interviewer: So you bought one of those, yes?
Participant: I did just buy one, I’d only bought a few things that day.
Interviewer: And have you had a chance to reuse it?
Participant: No, it’s just sitting on the side in the kitchen, and I have been to the shops since and not used it.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, okay.
Participant: I feel like I need to buy like lots of them so that I can keep a stash in the car, use them, but still have leftovers for next time.
Interviewer: Why do you prefer using, well you did mention that when you did a click and collect obviously you leave that option on, but when you go to, for a top-up shop do you also get a bag there?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And why not using your own bags or, I’m not insisting on this, I’m just asking the question?
Participant: Just because I don’t have them with me, I just don’t have them in the boot of the car, I don’t know, I know people probably unload their shopping and then go back out and put them in the boot of the car read for next time, I’m not that organised, unfortunately, I’m going to try but I’m not at the moment.
Interviewer: Okay, and where do you, sorry, this is not applicable, in your opinion how is important now to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Probably if you just didn’t have a bag for life with you and you had genuinely forgotten it you need to be able to carry your purchases out without, because there’s no boxes, there used to be boxes at the end of the checkouts as well, like cardboard boxes you could use, they seem to have disappeared, so you’d have to carry you know, you wouldn’t be able to carry a lot in your arms out to your car, you’d have to make a couple of journeys.
Interviewer: So if plastic bags were completely gone from the stores, would that be a problem?
Participant: I think after the first couple of times of having to make a couple of trips to your car you’d remember to bring them with you, so a short-term you know, hardship would probably work.
Interviewer: So basically back to the old days wouldn’t be a problem?
Participant: No, not at all.
Interviewer: And do you reuse, what do you basically, yeah, what do you do with these army of supermarket bags when they arrive at home?
Participant: Use them in the, we’ve got a small, I don’t have a big kitchen bin like most people, I just keep a really, really small like a plastic tub on the side and I use them to line that.
Interviewer: As bin liners?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: And any other uses?
Participant: Taking my lunch to work, I’m not ashamed to be seen with a Tesco carrier bag with my lunch in, and sometimes if we run out of the bags for the dog you know, picking up dog mess, if I’ve run out of those bags I’ll use a supermarket bag.
Interviewer: And does it happen that you throw them away because there are too many at home?
Participant: I have to be fair, I do have, I do occasionally run out, I don’t know how that happens but yeah, but currently I do have quite a few, and if I’m clearing out I will tidy most, put most of them in the bin.
Interviewer: Well approximately how many would you reckon you have now at home?
Participant: About 20.
Interviewer: Right, so coming now to the point you’ve just mentioned a little bit before, so you know what the plastic bag charge is isn’t it?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s a reasonable charge and like I say I wasn’t aware of it until just looking at this email I’ve had from Tesco saying that they’ll be used for local causes and stuff, so I think it’s good.
Interviewer: Do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: No, not really, I’ve been surprised how freely they’ve been available because they’ve got multi uses so basically they’re giving you you know, you can use it for other stuff as well and it must cost money.
Interviewer: And what is good and what is not as good about the plastic bag charge, what do you think?
Participant: Well the good thing is, is there a good thing really, yeah, I mean bag for life, my conscience would be better if I use those and I’ll feel a lot better when I’m at the checkout whenever else has got their bag for life, it’s a little bit embarrassing when you have to ask for a carrier bag or they’re just here for you to use, and some checkouts, some of the checkout cashiers get a little bit, mmm, they’re not very happy if you use the bags.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: Yeah, they can be a bit like, “oh, you don’t have a bag for life?”, “no, sorry”.
Interviewer: Why do you think they are a little bit unhappy about it?
Participant: Because probably they‘re thinking about the environment, I don’t know, or just thinking how lazy you are possibly.
Interviewer: Whatever, yeah, okay, and when did you hear for the first time about the 5p charge?
Participant: I was told actually, one of the, somebody in Tesco, a chap I was talking to on the fruit and veg who was helping me with something, I don’t know how the conver… he just said, “oh, by the way”, and told me then, yeah, that was a little while ago.
Interviewer: That it will happen in England, yeah?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And have you heard about other places in the UK or have you been to other places in the UK where the charge already exists, so did you know about…
Participant: No, I’m aware, I think they already charge in Ireland, I don’t know where I’ve heard that from, my husband’s Irish so possibly from his family.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s correct, yeah, and what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: The environment issues really, it’s like anything else isn’t it you know, car exhaust fumes etc., it’s inevitable, I’m not surprised.
Interviewer: Yeah, of course, and is there any kind of economic purpose or social purpose that can be achieved with it or not?
Participant: It’d be cheaper for the supermarkets, they’ll save money in buying them or producing them, whatever, however they get them from, they must go through millions, but I do think people who convert will feel a bit better about themselves, that they’re doing a little bit to help.
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge in England will fulfil these purposes?
Participant: I think so, I think so, maybe people who like, young people who don’t really do shopping but occasionally go in there, like my daughter for example, if she were to pop to the shop, the chance of her carrying a bag for life is pretty zero, so, and she’ll just expect to pay it and just not worry about it probably.
Interviewer: Will the introduction of this 5p charge affect you personally at all or not?
Participant: The price of it, no, no.
Interviewer: So, which means that you will, would that mean that you will start to reuse bags basically or would you not just care about the cost to pay for?
Participant: I mean paying 5p for a bag is not an issue but morally it is, morally I would change, I won’t be buying them unless I just, it’s one of those situations where I don’t, I’ll make more of an effort to have bags for life with me, or I’ll buy the bag for life, it’s never been, I’ve never, ever been offered one.
Interviewer: And do you find them not really easily visible?
Participant: No, yeah they used to be when they first came out, they would always be at the end of the aisles and I always used to say, “oh I must buy one of those, must buy one of those”, and never got round to it though I did buy it when, like I said I bought one the other day and I could see them, they were on the shelf but high above the cashier with no price indication and I did, she was, I had to ask twice for it, she didn’t know what I was talking about at first, so I was quite surprised she didn’t catch on, and when I said, “bag for life”, she looked at me strangely and I had to point up, and she went, “oh, one of these?”, so I said, “yes, please”, and then I didn’t know how much it was going to cost but I just thought oh I’ll buy it anyway, but it was only 80p, so.
Interviewer: Do you think this bag for life is often used in England or not?
Participant: I think a lot of people use them, and yesterday, no, not yesterday, I didn’t shop, Saturday I saw somebody with those, you know these different coloured bags that are all joined up and they sit in the trolley, so there’s 5 bags for life, but they’re not bags for life, they’re like canvas bags, they’re all joined together and then you open them up in the trolley and there’s your you know, as you’re scanning you’re putting them straight into it and I thought they looked quite good.
Interviewer: Oh right.
Participant: Because then you pick the whole thing up as one.
Interviewer: I’ve never seen those.
Participant: Yeah, I’ve seen them advertised online, I think I’ve seen an advent for them and then I’ve actually saw one in real life, yeah, I saw one the other day, quite nice.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen with the introduction of the plastic bag charge, will this change your current way of using bags, do you think you will…
Participant: Yeah, I will probably, I mean I’ll definitely buy more bags for life and try and keep some in the car all the time, and I’ll buy bin liners, I’ll just buy a roll of little bin liners for the bin, that doesn’t matter, doesn’t worry me.
Interviewer: And do you think how easy, quickly you will be able to change, so to swap to the different types of bags?
Participant: Me, personally?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: It’ll probably, it’ll be difficult because often I might go out at lunchtime and I might come home from work and then go to the shop, I might go straight from work, I just need to make sure that I’ve always got them in the car because I’m always in the car when I go to the shop, and then I expect those times I just haven’t got any if there’s bags for life I’ll just buy some more, I’ll probably end up with a cupboard full of bags for life as opposed to carrier bags.
Interviewer: Do you think the plastic bag charge will change your shopping behaviour at all or not?
Participant: No, not at all, no.
Interviewer: Your shopping routine will stay the same?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person at all this charge?
Participant: Yeah, definitely, I mean it’s food for thought and like I say morally I’ll try not to use them because I know it’s not the right thing to do.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any other changes after these plastic bag charge introduction or not?
Participant: I’m just trying to think now, I can’t think, oh yes, probably the little bags you put your vegetables in you know, the little fine clear bags that are offered, also when you buy meat from the counter it’s in one plastic bag and then because it’s meaty they’ll wrap it in another one so it’s 2 bags essentially once you’re putting it in your basket, and that could be changed, they could use like butchers used to use, paper, and wrap it in that sort of brown paper, it’d be more expensive for them I would have thought but then, and the vegetables, I mean you used to put them straight into your bag years ago, weigh them and put them straight in your bag but then that’d be difficult to put through the checkout wouldn’t it?
Interviewer: Mhmm, and do you think anything will change in your local area or in the country, or?
Participant: I do think they will go more, like I say I think they will, other bags will disappear and they’ll put the onus on the customer, eventually, once everyone’s got used to this plastic bag charge and you know, having use bags for life.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country or not?
Participant: Do I think what, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in England at the moment?
Participant: What, do you mean the bags for life or using a carrier bag for…
Interviewer: Yeah, basically bag reuse could include either using bags for life or people, being even heavy duty bags for life or using their own bags like rucksacks or whatever?
Participant: No, it’s not encouraged, no, it’s not encouraged, like I say I’ve never been offered one for sale, so.
Interviewer: Yeah, and the own bag use, so, people bringing their own bags from home, would that be, is that encouraged at all or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, you kind of associate that with older people, I do, like my mum will always carry a bag with her, and it feels like you kind of like the bag and the receipt like end the purchase, so you’ve got the item, it’s like a natural progression to get a bag, to get a receipt, it just feel like you’ve finished the transaction.
Participant: So, but yeah, I can’t imagine people carrying their own bags, apart from bags for life that they’ve specifically bought to put their food in, unless you get to a certain age.
Interviewer: Right, thank you, and should anything change in this respect do you think?
Participant: You mean with regards to food or any shopping?
Interviewer: Well with regards to food shopping for example, yeah.
Participant: No, I think they’re doing the right, I think they’re on the right road with starting the charge and using the bags for life, like I say I don’t know the future, I’m sure it will, other areas will change but I’m not sure it’ll be anytime soon, because often it takes a lot of planning for something like that so maybe 5 years down the line they’ll not be using the vegetable bags or the butchery bags.
Interviewer: Well another thing I wanted to ask about is, some of the shops and some types of bas will be exempt from the 5p charge, and these are for example small retailers, corner shops, these will be exempt in England in particular, also plastic bags for hot food and drinks, so take-aways will be exempt, also corner shops and bags like paper or biodegradable bags, do you think it’s a fair situation for you know, how would you, how would you…
Participant: Well my local shop, like corner shop if you like always asks do you want a bag and if I’ve just popped in for some milk or, I generally say no because they’ve kind of made the effort to ask so in my mind I’m thinking they don’t really want me to have one and I’ve got the car outside and it’s only one item, because that’s the only reason I would use that shop, for one or two items, but they do always ask, and they tend, the quality’s not good anyway so you can’t really carry very much in them, but other than that I’m not sure.
Interviewer: But would it be fair for them to charge you if the plastic bag charge was applied basically everywhere?
Participant: I think so because, yeah, because at the end of the day even if they kept the money themselves I wouldn’t mind because a) they’ve got to buy the bags and it’s trying to encourage you not to use them isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: So I wouldn’t mind if they did.
Interviewer: And how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges, well I have two examples here, one is congestion charge, the thing that exists in London, so how does plastic bag charg in your opinion compare to congestion charge?
Participant: Well I suppose it’s comparable as in it’s all to do with eco, being eco-friendly and the environment. The charge for the bags like I say as far as I know is going to be used for a good cause whereas the congestion charge I think just goes to the government for them to spend on whatever they like, I think in order for congestion charge to be fair why don’t they do it in all towns, cities even, because as far as I know I only know London that’s got a congestion charge, I don’t know anywhere else that has.
Interviewer: Yeah, and would you be in support of introduction of, I don’t remember now which city are you close to…
Participant: London’s the nearest.
Interviewer: Oh you’re in London, yes, so you already have, yeah, would you be in favour of introducing plastic bag charge in other places in the UK, in other big cities or just cities with pollution problems?
Participant: What, the congestion charge?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I think you don’t, yeah, I mean to go to the city, so cities normally have really good transport, I know there’s only underground in London, I don’t use that but train’s good, walking’s good, I don’t, I think, yeah, buses you don’t have to pay any extra on, so I think they, yeah, I don’t see why it should be any different from any other city, but not towns, just cities, city centres.
Interviewer: And so are you in favour of the congestion charge?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: You are, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And if there was it’s a sort of an idea of a charge which doesn’t really exist in the country but it does exist in Germany as far as we’re aware, it’s a little deposit that people pay on plastic packaging, so for example it will be a plastic bottle, drinks in a plastic bottle and then people would pay a little deposit and when they bring the packaging back, it could be probably individually packaged vegetables the same, so if they brought the packaging back they would get the deposit back, what do you think about that?
Participant: Well it’s interesting because it’s a little bit like, it seems to be going back to what it was like in the 70s where you’d get money back on a glass bottle so I remember that and it was a good way for children to make pocket money by taking all the, going round and collecting bottles from neighbours and taking them back, so can see, yeah, that’s not a bad thing, would I do it, I probably reluctantly would do it if it’s for the environment but it would be such a pain, unless you could have a bin at home and someone could collect it, but yeah, I don’t, I mean yeah, I suppose it’s doable isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, and what do you think will happen as a result of the introduction of the plastic bag charge in about 10 years’ time in England?
Participant: It’ll go back to the way it is now.
Interviewer: Oh, how?
Participant: Because things always go round and come round don’t they, so for example you used to get charged for bags, now you don’t, then you will and then I expect at some point you wasn’t again, and they may invent something that’s biodegradable that’s the same or similar to you know, a carrier bag, and that’s probably the way it’ll go actually.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, okay, thank you. Now just coming briefly to the points that again we were discussing in the diary but when we’re asking about different household behaviours and different things that you did on a daily basis or not, so I’ll just ask a few of those, not all of them, form the list, but yeah, I will ask whether you do that and why, and also to give a few examples and whether that’s a habit or whether that’s something that requires thinking for you, so do you tend to save water at home?
Participant: Save water?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I am, as a rule no but I do in brushing my teeth because I have to because my daughter goes mad because she did some even from junior school they did something on it in school about saving water, and she’s always insisted, she does it herself and if she came in the bathroom and saw me not have the tap turned off while I’m brushing my teeth she’d come and turn it off, so I’ve got in the habit of doing that so, but things like using the washing machine, dishwasher probably not, no, I don’t think about it, if I need to use it I just use it.
Interviewer: And how about energy you use at home, again do you tend to save energy?
Participant: Yeah, so I’ve got everything on the timer so everything’s on the time you know, from the central heating, underfloor heating, all of that and it just comes on when we need it, r don’t a use a lot of heating in this because the house is really warm so probably maybe 2 months of the year even though England’s quite cold this house is a warm house so we’re lucky that way, yeah, I put things on timers, because I, yeah, just try not, we don’t have the heating on because it gets very hots upstairs so I’d rather put a jumper on downstairs and then just be right up when I go to bed rather than going to bed and it’s too hot.
Interviewer: And regarding, do you have a, regarding water again do you have a water meter at home?
Participant: No, we don’t have a water meter, we’ve opted, we feel that we don’t need one at the moment, there’s 4 of us, 2 teenagers, one daughter who’s constantly in the bath, which is a really big bath so it takes quite a lot to fill, I don’t think it’d be cost effective, maybe when the children leave home possibly.
Interviewer: Yeah, of course, do you tend to reuse things at home?
Participant: Sorry, reuse?
Interviewer: Reuse any kind of things at home, just reuse of, whatever you can think of, jars, whatever, tubs?
Participant: Occasionally, like but as a rule no, I’m not very good at that, I’m more likely to throw it away and buy another one, I now it’s not very good, but.
Interviewer: And why is it not as practical to reuse?
Participant: If I don’t need to reuse it straight away I don’t want it sat around cluttering up the place because I’m a little bit like I’ll think right, I’m going to use that for that and then never use it and it just sits there and I end up throwing it anyway, so my mind-set is not very good so I just think oh, I’ll just throw it away now.
Interviewer: And in terms of household waste, what do you do usually with the waste?
Participant: It’s all more or less recycled by the Council, so we have a food waste bin with biodegradable bags in them, we have the one inside that we take outside, the little one, we’ve got cardboard and paper recycling bin, we’ve got a recycling bin for bottles, cans, plastic, and then we have a normal bin.
Interviewer: Are you happy with the sort of you know, with the recycling facilities that you currently have at home?
Participant: I don’t think it works because when we had just one bin emptied every week, now we have 2 bins, a recycling bin wheelie bin and a normal wheelie bin, so you start off with the recycling wheelie bin but they only empty them both every 2 weeks, so technically they’ve just given you 2 bins for the same thing so you end up putting, once your recycling bin’s full the recycling then will go in the other bin because you’ve got nowhere else to put it because you’ve got 2 weeks’ worth of waste, so they probably should, might as well have just stuck with weekly emptying, but they’ve got their reasons for that.
Interviewer: And is there a bin for garden waste and compost?
Participant: Yeah, we’ve got a brown bin for garden waste, grass cutting, hedge trimmings and stuff like that, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you tend to use that as well?
Participant: Yeah, we do use that, we didn’t have one for a while because you have to buy them, buy that one, £50 a year I think it is, and we just never got round to arranging it, so my husband would just go to the tip using black sacks and go to the tip and then I just thought one day I just thought no, I’ll ring the Council and get one of those, and they just put it on your Council Tax bill every year, so it’s just like a regular every yearly trying.
Interviewer: So you basically invested your own money to get that?
Participant: Yeah, that’s £50 a year, but it’s convenient because they come and collect it every 2 weeks.
Interviewer: And you produce quite a bit of that waste?
Participant: Yeah, yes it’s normally full by the time they get here.
Interviewer: But otherwise you would be just recycling, sorry putting them in the general waste?
Participant: It would go, what the lawn cuttings and that, you mean the garden stuff, waste?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: No, it would go to the tip, we’d put it in black sacks and my husband would take it to the local tip.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, so they need to be disposed of…
Participant: Yeah, disposed of in the garden waste, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and coming to the driving, how often do you drive?
Participant: I drive every day.
Interviewer: You drive every day to work?
Participant: To work, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you tend to save car trips at all, or?
Participant: No, not very good at that, if I need to go in the car I’ll just go because it’s just quicker.
Interviewer: And is it the driving distance to work, is it, how long is it?
Participant: It’s really not very long at all, about, I think I’ve timed it, 7 minutes.
Interviewer: So it’s a few miles?
Participant: Yeah, it’s about 2 miles.
Interviewer: Would that be walkable or not?
Participant: It is walkable but it’s 7 minutes in the car but probably 40 minutes’ walk, which I just don’t have the time to do that in the morning, well I could do if I got up earlier but I don’t want to.
Interviewer: And regarding the way how you drive is sort of saving on petrol important to you or not?
Participant: Not so much the petrol but I’m quite a cautious driver and my car tells me what gear to be in, so it does tell you what, and I’m assuming it’s telling you that because it’s the most efficient way to drive.
Interviewer: I see, okay, and do you sometimes walk or cycle for short distance?
Participant: Mhmm, yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of short of walks?
Participant: I walk up to my sister’s which is about 15 minutes away, I walk to the corner shop which is just next door to her, I don’t cycle, I used to cycle everywhere but my bike’s all rusty now so, and I would do if I had a decent bike.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how often do you walk, maybe how many times a week?
Participant: Not a lot, maybe once a week.
Interviewer: Right, and does it happen to you when coming again to the purchases, does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly products or organic products or sustainable?
Participant: I don’t really, no, I don’t consider that much, I would buy, if, I’d buy it if I needed t so if the eco product was better for your skin or better for your clothes then I’d buy it, but as a rule I don’t think I do, no.
Interviewer: And why is it not important to you?
Participant: I think it goes back to when they first were available, they were extra expensive and now I just, my eye’s not drawn to them and nobody’s really said you know, nobody’s pressured me into doing it you know, there’s nobody in the shop saying, “oh, have you tried this, what do you think about this?”, you know, I just tend to go for the product that I’m used to buying, and I am a bit of sucker for an advert, so yeah, but yeah, tend to stick to what I know really.
Interviewer: And things like, I don’t know, free range eggs, or you know…
Participant: Oh, I always by free range eggs, free range chicken.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is the reason for that?
Participant: Just because I think it’s going to be, why do I buy them, I think because I think it’s more expensive the quality’s going to be better, the chicken, free range chicken certainly is completely different to the other chicken, you can just, texture etc., eggs I just think well, they’re nearly chicken so I don’t know, I would never, ever knowing eat a non-free range egg.
Interviewer: So it’s for the quality?
Participant: Yeah, it’s the quality and I just think those, there was so many documentaries on in the last what, 5 years, showing you chicken farms and etc., that you just can’t enjoy eating it knowing that it’s been farmed that way.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to support environmental organisations and helping in the environmental issues at all?
Participant: No, not because I wouldn’t, I don’t want to, but my, it’s not, I’m more, it’s not my thing, I’m more for people so I’d go for a child or a young person issue and then that takes a lot you know, that’s a lot, and the environmental stuff doesn’t really, I don’t know, it’s not the right answer I know but I’d just be more, if I’m going to put any effort into something or money into something it would be for young people.
Interviewer: And why would you say these kind of social issues or whatever we can call them, are more important, or why are they for you more important, is that an indication at all of importance for you?
Participant: It’s because it’s part of my job so it’s linked with my work, I mean I’m not against, I mean obviously I would do what I can to save the environment etc., but my main you know, focus…
Interviewer: It’s just a preference, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m a bit head in the sand, I try not to think about it, there’s so much other stuff going on currently now and to sit and worry what could happen in 10 years’ time you know, I just don’t, I just try not to think about it really, sort of like I say head in the sand, I’m more concerned with day-to-day current stuff, I know I should but I just don’t, as I’ve got children I really should but you know, I just think they said when we were young these things were going to happen and there’s always going to be something that’s not going to be right with the world that way, a lot of things are fixable and I suppose starting with plastic bags is one of them isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, and would you say that environment is a part of your personal identity at all or not really?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: And is it an important part of your life?
Participant: I’m mean I’m aware, I mean I live in rural, semi-rural I suppose, and I know we’ve got a massive housing project going up and yeah, I’m not happy about that, I don’t think it’s right, it’s all fields and farms round here, so from that point of view, but I would never stop it because obviously the homes are needed but I would think I would rather they didn’t.
Interviewer: And also what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Recycling mainly, that’s the first thing I would think of, recycling, having a car, because we’ve got 2 cars so having a car that wasn’t emitting massive exhaust fumes all over the place, things like that, that’s the things I think of, planting trees.
Interviewer: Okay, do you feel that you have enough knowledge and skills around environmental issues?
Participant: Well probably not but you can you know, you can find the knowledge, you’ve only got to go on the internet if there’s anything you were curious about or needed to know you’d find the answer, but I don’t really, like I say it’s not really at the top of my agenda on a daily basis.
Interviewer: So would you be seeking to improve those skills or not really?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I definitely, I’ll support anything, I just need to be told to do it, so if someone says to me, “oh this is the best thing to do”, then I’ll do it as best I can, I just wouldn’t seek to work out what was the best thing to do.
Interviewer: Yeah, so coming to that, do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: I don’t think we’re given, I don’t think we’re offered enough, I don’t you know, yeah you see the odd advert, you might see something in a magazine, you might watch a documentary on it but day-to-day I don’t think you’re you know, given, people are you know, showing you the way to change.
Interviewer: So what kind of things do you think could be improved in that area?
Participant: Well you know, car share for example, I mean I probably, I could be sat at the top of the road waiting to pull out on a roundabout and there’s 5 of us from the same school sat in the same jam going to the same place more or less from the same road, but it’s not something I would instigate, but if it was instigated by someone else I would definitely say, “oh yes, I’ll take part”, that mainly.
Interviewer: Do you think there is enough in the country there is enough legislation and regulation around environmental things, around environmental issues at all, or not?
Participant: I believe there is around things like airports, I live near Gatwick Airport so I’m aware that we’re not going to get another runway because of building regulations, that type of things is you know, you need sort of green space as well, things like that, but not fully, no, not really.
Interviewer: Is there anything you can think of that could be done or should be done?
Participant: No, not off the top of my head, I mean I’m sure there’s ways you know, you get offered things like solar panels and things like that for your house to help with your energy heating, and because then they say, “oh yeah, have one of these, you won’t have to pay, it’ll pay for your heating and you’ll get paid money back on whatever you save, whatever extra energy it stores”, and then that’s fine for a couple of years and then it all changes, no you’re not going to get you know, it’s a little bit, sometimes it feels a little bit like it’s just, oh what’s the word, like a fad, like a, just something you go through, it’s not going to last, just someone’s idea that they might work and then doesn’t, so it’s not tried and tested.
Interviewer: Are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Probably could do an awful lot more.
Interviewer: And what kind of things do you think you could do more?
Participant: Put my washing machine on a night-time and I don’t because the dog’s in the kitchen and I think it might wake her up, so it sounds like I care more about the dog than the environment, so I would have done in the past because I’d have thought it’s cheaper for me, and it is cheaper, and I can’t think what else, maybe not driving so much but as we’re sort of semi-rurally you kind of need a car to get to most places, so transport’s not brilliant here.
Interviewer: Okay, and maybe just the last question about your neighbourhood, what are the things in your neighbourhood that you really like and things that you think present a problem?
Participant: Well I live on a very small housing estate sort of surrounded by farmland, what I like about living here is everybody takes care of their house so everyone’s gardens are well tended and they’re looked after you know, there’s I don’t know how many house, probably 150, and I’d say 99% of them are really well looked after, so it’s a sought after housing estate to live on, so house prices are quite good, I’ve got good neighbours, all retired so I’ve got great support during the day if I’m at work anything goes wrong with the house, and the only downside is facilities for young people, we don’t really have an awful lot.
Interviewer: And how about things like littering for example, is this an issue…
Participant: No, I don’t have any at all.
Interviewer: It’s clean, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, and dog mess we don’t have, everyone picks up and if they don’t someone will know who that is and it will get back to them, so yeah.
Interviewer: That’s wonderful, fantastic. Well I think I came to the end of my questions.
Participant: Excellent.
Interviewer: So it’s just one probably minute afterwards I could ask you maybe a few questions, demographics ones but very, very briefly, and so before I do that is there anything that you would like to emphasise or add, anything you forgot to mention?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, just there’s another round of surveys isn’t there?
Interviewer: Yeah…
Participant: When does that start?
Interviewer: That will be part 2, it will be at mid-November, so it’s…
Participant: Oh okay, it’s a while yet then, okay.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, so obviously if there is anything you can also say at that stage.