Interviewer: So, before we start, do you have any questions?
Participant: No, I'm fine.
Interviewer: Excellent, lovely, so overall, how did you find filling out the diary?
Participant: Yeah, it was very straightforward.
Interviewer: Oh cool.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I found it good and, you know, once you'd got used to the questions you could, when you were doing like recycling during that day or, you know, doing some of the questions, you'd think 'oh, I'll just put that on now', so yeah, it was good.
Interviewer: Was there anything you found difficult?
Participant: No I think it was straightforward, I mean like emailing the receipts over were fine as well, it all went quite smoothly.
Interviewer: Fantastic, and was there anything you found surprising about the study?
Participant: No, not really. No.
Interviewer: OK, not a problem. So, thinking about your shopping routine, could you please describe to me what your typical shopping routine would be?
Participant: Well, me and my roommate would probably see what like day we've got off together in the week and then we'd probably go together, but we usually do a big shop like once every two or three weeks and then in the middle we might have a bread and milk and cordial and stuff like that, we'd probably just pick that up ourselves, so we'd probably just do all the shopping in like one go and then stuff we run out of just pick up when we can. But we don't, we don't go shopping that often to be honest 'cos there's only the two of us, we just buy all the food and just make it, you know, last.
Interviewer: So you try and buy as much as you possibly can to keep like in the cupboards and the fridge or.
Participant: Yeah, because we have to get a taxi home as well, because we don't have a car, so we try and do it all at once so we don't have to like, you know, pay for a taxi so often, because I mean the shops are near but you can't carry loads of stuff home.
Interviewer: Is there a particular shop that you normally go to?
Participant: Between Aldi and Tesco really 'cos they're right next door to each other so sometimes we'll go into Tesco and get like the branded stuff we like and then go to Aldi and get like meat and fruit and veg and that's the same really.
Interviewer: So you prefer the meat and veg from Aldi is it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Makes sense.
Participant: So that's what we do really.
Interviewer: So is that something that you plan with you and your housemate, do you have to write down a shopping list as you go?
Participant: Yeah we do, we write down like what meals we want, you know, on certain days, and then we think 'oh we need that for this meal', we write that down, we have to remember to pick that up.
Interviewer: That's very organised.
Participant: And, yeah, we keep a list 'cos if we don't we'll just end up forgetting things, yeah.
Interviewer: So with the Tesco and Aldi, just going back to that a sec, is there any other shops that you normally use or do you pretty much always go there?
Participant: No we pretty much usually go there, we go in Iceland sometimes, you know, if I know there's an offer on or something like that, but they're pretty much just the shopping retailers that we use.
Interviewer: Is there any sort of things that you look out for when you're shopping, is it the quality of the food or is it the cost or is it personal preference?
Participant: I mean we look at the cost 'cos like we're both students so we don't have that much to spare on food so yeah, we'll look at cost and you know if something's on offer then we'll buy like, you know, maybe in a big amount and like so we can just use it as we go. I'm not sure what else we look out for really, just like, I suppose yeah, I mean we like, if I see something that's on offer I will go into it and shop just for that.
Interviewer: That makes sense.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And with you and your housemate, who is it, who pays for it?
Participant: We just both club together and then whoever pays on the card will give the other person the money, so we just half it.
Interviewer: That makes sense.
Participant: 'Cos we all kind of use the same amount of food and stuff like that, so we just half it all the time.
Interviewer: So you do these great big large shops where you and your housemate both go and you just try and stock up as much as you possibly can.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What about for the smaller shops, you said you got like milk and bread and cordial, is that.
Participant: Like last week I think I, yeah, I picked that up, just like a corner shop, 'cos we've got a corner shop quite local, it's only a small one, so say like I went last week, she'll probably get it this week. So we just do it like that, it's like 'oh I got bread last time, go on, you go and get it'!
Interviewer: Brilliant.
Participant: Things like that, yeah.
Interviewer: I've got a couple of questions now looking at bag use, so can you give me some, about five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear 'plastic bag'.
Participant: Plastic bag... weak 'cos they break a lot, annoying because in our flat we seem to kind of like accumulate a lot so that's we try and buy the bags for life, sometimes they're not useful because if you put really heavy things in them they'll just break anyway, expressions... plastic bags...
Interviewer: So it seems very much about how you don't find them very useful, you find them quite [?? 07:15]
Participant: Yeah. I mean they're good for some things, light items, but if you're carrying something heavy then it usually breaks for me! I can't think of any more.
Interviewer: That's alright.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And thinking back, do you remember the first time in your life that, or when you became aware of plastic bags in supermarkets?
Participant: Probably when I used to go round with me mum just like she'd put stuff on the trolley thing and then I'd pack 'em, so probably I noticed that, thinking back I don't really remember that many bags for life being around, I just remember like just plastic bags.
Interviewer: The thin sort of normal ones.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So you try and avoid these thin ones, you try and use the bags for life you were saying.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I usually put one in, put about five in one of the big bags for life and take them, because we have a lot of plastic bags anyway, you know, when we forget, so I do always try and remember, I usually write it on my shopping list, like 'don't forget bags'! 'Cos I'm awful, I'll get halfway to there and I'm like 'oh I've not got the bags'.
Interviewer: So it's become part of your routine of shopping.
Participant: Yeah, I mean me mum and dad have done it since like bags for life started getting popular so I've just copied them I suppose.
Interviewer: Can I ask what type of bags for life, are they the really thick ones, are they.
Participant: We've got a mixture, we've got some of the Tesco material ones where they're like a bit woven and then we've got like Aldi plastic ones.
Interviewer: I know the ones, yeah, a little bit thicker.
Participant: Yeah, so they're not as good as the Tesco ones but we do have some fabric ones which are really good. So, I mean even if we go and forget bags we'll probably just get a few more bags for life anyway 'cos, you know, you can never have too many of them!
Interviewer: It's something that you have to write down then on your shopping list when you're about to go.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: But you do tend to forget sometimes.
Participant: Yeah sometimes, but I do always try to remember.
Interviewer: That makes sense, yeah, so why do you think bags for life have been named and do you think they live up to that name?
Participant: I don't know because if a bag for life’s has always broke on me I've never really bothered to take it back and ask for another bag.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: Yeah, I think, I just think 'oh I'll just get another one', 'cos they're only like, you know, 3 and 6p or something like that, I couldn't be bothered just taking another bag back and like 'can I have another one please', so.
Interviewer: Would you feel a bit silly doing that?
Participant: Yeah I think so, I would just buy another one.
Interviewer: 'Cos they're so cheap.
Participant: Yeah. So I can't say I've ever done it, no.
Interviewer: Have you, I mean have they ever broke on you or.
Participant: Yeah, but only after like a lot of use, like we recently moved and we put, I used a lot of them to be honest just to carry stuff in, and I don't, [?? 10:30] say like one or two broke but that was because I had really heavy stuff in it, so I do think they're worth the value, you know, they last a long time, yeah.
Interviewer: That makes sense. And so where do you keep all these bags? Do you keep them in the house, do you keep them in the car or, you take a taxi, sorry, you said that.
Participant: Yeah, we just have a spare cupboard and to be honest they're all just shoved in there, and when you open the cupboard about five or six of them fall out! So we don't tend to go in it that often, but that's it, we just, yeah, they accumulate don't they, so that's just where we keep 'em.
Interviewer: Do you know how many you have?
Participant: I'll go and have a peek now, there's quite a few I'd say, oh we've got a freezer one as well actually, a Tesco freezer one. [At the cupboard looking at the bags] Oh God, I'd say we've got about twenty you know, yeah, a mixture of like Tesco and Aldi ones, yeah, twenty.
Interviewer: And the freezer, that's the one that keeps things cold is it?
Participant: Yeah, so if we buy our frozen food we'll put it in there, like it don't defrost or ought waiting for a taxi.
Interviewer: And it doesn't, yeah you're not too concerned about the fact you've got a real mix of different supermarket bags?
Participant: No, not too bothered, like if I go in Tesco with Aldi bags, no I don't really, it doesn't bother me, 'cos I mean loads of people do it, you see people going in with like Marks & Spencer bags and stuff like that so I'm, no, it doesn't bother me.
Interviewer: Do you ever find yourself taking the single use plastic bags anymore?
Participant: Only if I forget, or if I go to the corner shop, to be honest I don't really remember when I go to the corner shop 'cos I'm either coming like home from uni or pop there, but no I don't take 'em if I don't have to, if I'm only getting milk I'll just carry milk 'cos I can't be bothered with them to be honest.
Interviewer: Just in the little top-up shops you just carry whatever 'cos it's just round the corner from you is it?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever keep a little one in your bag at all, like in a handbag or a backpack?
Participant: No I can't say I do, no I mean me bag's big enough but I've just never thought of it.
Interviewer: Yeah, 'cos you carry them by hand.
Participant: Yeah, no, I just grab 'em!
Interviewer: What do you think would happen if they took all the plastic bags away from supermarkets, do you think that would affect you?
Participant: I think people would eventually get used to, you know, taking bags for life or keeping 'em in the car because you'd know about you can't just go shopping and rely on a plastic bags.
Interviewer: Yeah, you'd have to plan it a bit more.
Participant: Yeah. You think it'd be something to think about because if you just did a big shop you wouldn't have anything to carry it in. So yeah, I think if, you know, there was no plastic bags anymore it'd take time but people would get used to it.
Interviewer: So as you might have heard about, there is, have you heard about the plastic bag charge that might be coming in?
Participant: I know they do it in Wales and I think there's been some talks about doing it in England, is it October?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Is that right? Yeah.
Interviewer: So is that where you've heard about it, you've heard about it being discussed for England or have you heard about it for Wales as well?
Participant: Well I know in Wales you have to pay 5p for a plastic bag and all I've heard is that they're bringing that into England where you have to pay five pence, you know, for every bag you use, but that's all I've heard really.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the 5p charge?
Participant: I think it's good because we go to Wales quite regularly, we have a caravan there, so when you're in Wales you always carry a bag for life with you, I always feel like because I couldn't be bothered paying 5p for 'em I always have bags for life with me, so I do think, I think it'll be better in England to be honest because people will start bringing all bags for life instead of paying for 'em all the time. Because if plastics bags are 5p anyway then you may as well get the bags for life.
Interviewer: Do you think, do you find it surprising at all that they're introducing it now in England?
Participant: No because I know Wales have done it for quite a while so I'm surprised we haven't done it earlier really because I mean I don't know if it's been working for Wales but when we go we try not to use the plastic bags, so, yeah I think it's a good idea, yeah definitely, people will get used to it though, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think there'll be some objections at the start?
Participant: I mean I suppose there'll be people moaning about it but there's not much you can do really is there? So there's not much point and they just have to get, you know, you'll have to get used to bringing bags for life, there's no other option really!
Interviewer: Just a bit of an inconvenience.
Participant: Yes I suppose so, but I think, you say, if you get like eight bags, yeah, that's 40p but it's still 40p and it's going towards you know, like, like helping to get rid of plastic bags and like the disposal of them so it's not that much you have to pay really. So I think it's a good idea.
Interviewer: What do you, what would you say you think are the main purposes behind a plastic bag charge?
Participant: Probably to try to stop people using 'em as much because if more people buy the bags for life and not the plastic bags then there'll be less to like get rid of because I know it takes ages for 'em to dispose, so obviously they're trying to stop people from using 'em but also to get some extra money in helping, you know, go towards the disposal of them.
Interviewer: Yeah, so that'll be where the money goes to.
Participant: Yeah, so I think it's just to try and push the public in that way to stop using 'em!
Interviewer: Have you heard anything about where the money will be used for?
Participant: I just know I read a bit of the money's going towards the disposal of 'em, 'cos I know it's quite hard, you know, 'cos after so many years, they're not really biodegradable, but that's all I've heard so I'm not sure about where the rest of the money's going, or if it's all going to that. I'm not too sure if it's all going to that or if it's going to other places as well.
Interviewer: I mean so you've got, you know, definitely you think it's gonna try and reduce people from using bag use.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think there might be any other impacts that might happen because of the bag charge?
Participant: No I don't think so really because I mean people will still do the same amount of shopping I think, I don't think it'll...
Interviewer: Buying more.
Participant: No I don't think it'll put them off because, you know, you've got to buy what food you've got to buy, so I just think they'll either pay for the plastic bags or they'll buy bags for life. But I don't know, maybe [?? 18:10] if you're thinking 'oh I got something from the corner shop, maybe you'd think 'oh I'll wait until tomorrow 'cos I'll have to buy a bag', but I mean I wouldn't, I'd just pay the 5p so I don't think it'll change shopping habits much.
Interviewer: Do you think it'll change yours?
Participant: No because most of the time I take my bags for life anyway and if not, I just pay whatever money I had to, to buy the bags. So it wouldn't stop me buying the amount of food that I buy.
Interviewer: So, you know, 'cos it sounds like you take a lot of bags for life with you when you're shopping.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what'll be the main reasons for taking them?
Participant: I don't know, I think they're easy because you can take more in them instead of having loads of plastic bags so I feel like I take them because they're more convenient for me, and I use the same ones and then I don't have as many plastic bags in my cupboard, I have a lot of bags for life but I feel like I do reuse them a lot so it's worth it. So that's the main reason I take it, I feel like they're easier to lift and hold as well, they don't dig into your hands as much.
Interviewer: So it's a bit more comfortable.
Participant: Yeah, because the plastic bags are like dig in quite a lot, but the bags for life aren't too bad.
Interviewer: Yeah it sounds like you were saying earlier that you found the single use plastic bags very weak and.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I've been walking home before and, you know, they've broke on me and stuff and not really [?? 19:47] yeah! Not really far and that, you know, with the bag for life.
Interviewer: That makes sense.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So it's not gonna, you don't think the plastic bag charge will change your behaviour of when you're shopping.
Participant: No not at all.
Interviewer: Do you think it might make people more, think more about the environment?
Participant: I think some people may think it's a good thing they're bringing in the charge, you know, because less plastic bags might be used because of the environment but I don't really, it might make people feel a bit better not using as many plastic bags. I don't know, I don't know if it would really make me think about the environment, I think I'd be happy that a bit of the charge is going towards, you know, the disposal of 'em, but apart from that I don't really think I think about the environment that much regarding the plastic bags.
Interviewer: But it would be nice to know that money is going towards the environment.
Participant: Yeah I think it's a good thing because it must be expensive to, you know, try and get rid of them all, so yeah, I'm quite, I'm happy with it.
Interviewer: But it probably won't be that you'll be buying many single use bags 'cos you'll be taking your own bags which is something you do quite often.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, do you think it will make a, say, a change in your local area as well?
Participant: Yeah, I think more people will try and buy bags for life or even buy the plastic bags and reuse them, I don't think they'll be too happy paying it all the time, you know, the money, I do think it'll try and change the habits a bit, to maybe try and save a bit of money 'cos I know a lot of people that go shopping a lot, so I suppose it would add up.
Interviewer: You think it will affect them more if they shop more.
Participant: Yeah, I think the people who shop more will think more about it because they'll be the one paying most of the charges, so yeah, I do think people will make an extra bit of an effort to take bags or have bags in the bag or the car, or even just buy a bag for life, yeah, I do think it'll change.
Interviewer: And just going back quickly, I just remembered that you said that your parents always use bags for life as well.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is that where you picked up the habit from is it?
Participant: Yeah I think so, I mean me dad likes the really big Sports Direct bags, he's obsessed with them! And he'll just take about two or three of them to like Tesco and he'll just put all his stuff in that and then put that in the boot so he's only got about, he's only using about three bags, and although they get really heavy it's, he finds it less messing around, so I suppose that's where I got it from, and he always keeps them in his car, like he's never without 'em so he hardly uses any plastic bags.
Interviewer: And he does it for convenience as well it sounds like, does he?
Participant: Yeah, I think he just finds it easier to pack and even like to take into the house and I don't think one's ever broke on him so they are very strong.
Interviewer: Does he ever talk about the environmental reasons or is it just something that he does?
Participant: No I just think it's something for his convenience and it makes it easier for him when he's shopping and when he's like packing and unpacking, no I don't really think he thinks about the plastic bags, I think he just likes them big bags to be honest!
Interviewer: I'll have to keep an eye out for those ones.
Participant: Yeah they're good!
Interviewer: Do you think that reusing your bags like in that sort of way, do you think that's a normal thing for most people to do, and do you think it should be encouraged more?
Participant: I think it's normal for the people I know, most people I know use them sort of bags, and I do think, yeah, they should be encouraged because then you use less plastic bags which, you know, you won't accumulate in your house and it'll also be better for the environment, but I think like this charge that's being brought in, I think that will help, I think that will encourage them to do it.
Interviewer: Do you think the 5p will be enough to really make people change, do you think it's a good price?
Participant: Yeah, I do because like I say, if you buy eight or ten bags that's like 40/50p a time so I mean when you do a big shop it's very easy to use a lot of plastic bags, so yes, I do think people will think 'I don't want to use them' because they don't want to spend 50p every so many days, and like it's an inconvenience as well [?? 24:45] you've only got one, you know, one, you only need one bag and you haven't got 5p on you or you have to break into a bigger note, I know you're already paying for something but, you know, people might find it a bit inconvenient so they might bring bags instead.
Interviewer: So when the 5p charge is coming to England soon, in October, some type of bags and some type of shops, the charge might not apply, so...
Participant: Oh right.
Interviewer: ...do you find that fair or not?
Participant: Not really, I mean what, what types of shops is that like?
Interviewer: Shops with not as many employees as say the larger shops, so smaller local businesses won't have to.
Participant: I don't really see what difference it is, it's still a plastic bag isn't it, I mean it's not, I don't know, the businesses won't have to contribute will they?
Interviewer: I don't think so.
Participant: No, so I don't see what a lot difference it is, it makes, because, alright they might not use as many plastic bags as Tesco but they're still using 'em, so I just say it'd be, it should be all across really, that's not very fair, yeah, should just be the same.
Interviewer: So say like your local corner shop, say if they didn't have to charge 5p would you take plastic bags from there then?
Participant: Probably not to be honest, I know it sounds dead petty but if I know I can just go there and get a plastic bag I wouldn't think about it as much as when I go to Tesco, so, yeah, I do think it should be everywhere then because if I was coming home then I'd probably just nip in and get a bag and then go to the shop, but if the corner shop didn't do it then I'd probably just get the bag from there, 'cos I know like we have a Spar near us as well and I know they already charge 5p.
Interviewer: Oh do they?
Participant: Yeah, so, you know, I do actually take bags to Spar, but I usually just go to a corner shop, so yeah it should be everywhere really I think.
Interviewer: What about clothes shops, do you think they should charge for bags?
Participant: Yeah, I think they should if they're gonna bring it in then it should be all shops, but I mean some clothes shop, like I know like New Look and Primark they do paper bags, you know, they've changed them so like you can recycle 'em and stuff, so maybe not them bags because they're not plastic but the rest of the clothes shops, yeah, I think it should just be one rule for all.
Interviewer: Yeah, so maybe not paper ones, maybe they can be a bit more sustainable.
Participant: Yeah, so maybe not the paper ones but yeah, if it's any plastic bags it should just be 5p for everyone who use everywhere, that's what I think anyway.
Interviewer: Do you think it'd be better if more people used paper bags then than plastic ones?
Participant: Yeah because like it says, you know, they've already been made by like recycled materials and then like I recycle mine, so I suppose it just keeps going, so yeah I do think paper bags are better.
Interviewer: OK yeah, that sounds good, and how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, like a congestion charge?
Participant: I don't think it'll make a, like as big as a difference because with congestion charges, you know, I suppose people could pay that every day, but with plastic bags I don't know, for me I only go shopping, you know, like once or twice every two weeks so it wouldn't make as big as a difference to me, but it, I don't know, it may do to other people but I think the congestion charge is worse, I don't think the plastic bag one that will affect people dramatically.
Interviewer: Yeah, because they don't need to think about it every day, it's just something every now and then.
Participant: Yeah, so I don't think it's too bad.
Interviewer: And there's also some talk about extra charges for things like plastic bottles or plastic packaging and individually wrapped vegetables and fruit.
Participant: Right?
Interviewer: Do you think that'll be a good idea?
Participant: What is it like, you know, if you get a four pack of apples and they've got plastic packaging on it, is that what you mean?
Interviewer: Yeah that sort of thing.
Participant: Well yeah, I suppose it would encourage people to buy the apples without the plastic, it would encourage me.
Interviewer: It would?
Participant: Yeah I think so. I don't see why they do it sometimes anyway, they would literally just have like all single apples out. Yeah I suppose it's the same principle 'cos you're using plastic, I hadn't really thought about it like that before though, like when you buy a bag of carrots in a plastic bag, yeah.
Interviewer: And like you see some pieces of fruit that are individually wrapped in plastic, like pineapples sometimes or melons.
Participant: Yeah, I suppose there's not much need for it really is there.
Interviewer: So it might make you think a bit more if you, if there was an extra charge.
Participant: Yeah if they put an extra charge on it then it would, I think it would make people think a bit more, yeah definitely, 'cos I just think people will think 'oh why is this more expensive than the apples with no plastic', and everything, we would go for the apples with no plastic, yeah.
Interviewer: So it's being introduced, the plastic bag charge, in October, what do you think will happen in about ten years’ time, do you think it'll still be having an effect?
Participant: I think most people by then will be used to taking bags for life so maybe there won't be as many plastic bags around or maybe they won't be available, like people, or companies, will just get rid of plastic bags and only sell the bags for life. But yeah, in ten years’ time I suppose like children growing up, that's all they'll know, a bag charge.
Interviewer: Right, yeah, the next generation so they just.
Participant: Yeah, so they'll just grow up either trying not to buy bags or using bags for life instead so I suppose it'll just be normal for them, but for the people that, you know, remember when you didn't have to pay 5p, yeah, I think habits will change.
Interviewer: Yeah, people will get used to the new...
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: ...things and they just do them.
Participant: Yeah, and I don't think it's something that dramatic, I just think people will get used to it very easily.
Interviewer: That's good.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, so I've got a few questions now about different environmental behaviours that you might do round the house, so do you save water at home?
Participant: Yeah, like I always turn the tap off when I'm brushing me teeth. I don't think there's anything I do to save water that I think about but we do have more showers than baths, so I suppose that saves water, but I never really think 'oh I won't do that, I'll save water', I just think I have maybe some good habits that I shower more than bath and like when I boil the kettle I don't fill it right up, and I suppose when I wash the pots I only use as much water as I need. So yeah.
Interviewer: And have you, are these things to save in the environment or.
Participant: I don't know, it's something I've always done like since I lived at my mum and dad's house, so I suppose it's to save water, or maybe not for the environment, maybe more for the bills to be honest, but I can't say I really think about the environment when I, you know, I'm using water.
Interviewer: is it just something that's become part of your routine now has it?
Participant: Yeah. Yeah, I just think 'oh so what, I'll do that' but maybe more towards I will.
Interviewer: How about things like electricity and heat?
Participant: Yeah I'm quite bad for that! Yeah, definitely, I'd rather put a coat on than put the heating on if there's just me in the house 'cos I just think there's no point, but my mum was like that as well, like she'd shout at us if we left lights on and if, you know, I get shouted at if there was only me in the house and I turned the heating on! So yeah, I do go around turning stuff off 'cos my roommate's quite bad for it so I'm always shouting at her! Yeah, I do think I do that a lot.
Interviewer: So that's something that you grew up with that you're sort of carrying on now.
Participant: Yeah, but then again I do think that's more for the bill as well 'cos my mum was always moaning about how much she spent so that's what I think about.
Interviewer: Yes, cut down on the bills.
Participant: Yeah, definitely!
Interviewer: How about reusing things at home?
Participant: Reuse... I sometimes like reuse jars that have had sauces in, I sometimes reuse them.
Interviewer: What do you use them for, if I can ask that.
Participant: Ooh, I know this sounds silly but you know if I get, if I cook mince then I'll put the fat into that jar instead of putting it down the sink, 'cos it clogs up the sink sometimes so I'll reuse that, and then like later I'll just wait until it's, it sounds dead weird, I'll wait until it's gone hard and then I can put it in the bin then, and then like I'll recycle the jar once I've used it. And I reuse bottles, instead of buying a drink outside, because drinks are so expensive at the moment.
Interviewer: Is that things like water is it?
Participant: Yeah, like you can pay like a pound, a pound fifty for a bottle of water so I can fill it up at home, so I always take a bottle of water out, you know, to go to university or go anywhere really. I don't think there's anything else I reuse really.
Interviewer: Do you, is something, or jumping back again I'm afraid, thinking about packaging in the supermarkets, do you look at the packaging of items when you're buying things?
Participant: No I can't say I do really because I've never really thought about like buying single apples instead of apples instead of apples in plastic bags, 'cos I think they're all together already I would probably grab them rather than the single ones, so no, I can't say I think about it at all.
Interviewer: And you said as well about you recycle some of your jars.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there other things that you recycle in the house?
Participant: Yeah, we recycle everything really! Everything that I can, like milk cartons, toilet roll holders and you know, like paper, cardboard, everything really, but I think that's because when I used to live with me mum and dad, I know I keep saying that, but that was my job, my job was to do all the recycling, so I suppose I just carried that on, and I'll always moan at my roommate, she's worse than I am, and I'm like 'why have you put that in the bin', so yeah, I am quite a keen recycler.
Interviewer: What is it, do the council come and pick up the recycling do they?
Participant: Yeah, we have, we live in like a block of sixteen flats so we have like big bins, just one bin for each recycling but they're quite massive, so they come like every like two weeks I think it is, yeah, and the council do it so we don't have to go far to recycle at all.
Interviewer: You just have to keep it one place and then you chuck it in the recycling bin when it's ready.
Participant: Yeah, it's really easy that, I'm on the ground floor so I just walk like ten steps outside so to be honest, if I'm cooking then I'll just recycle there and then if I'm using like a jar that I don't need or something, or if I've just used a bottle I'll just walk outside and do it there, you know, instead of having a load to gather.
Interviewer: Yeah, you just do it straightaway.
Participant: Yeah, just do it bit by bit really.
Interviewer: So how about travelling to different things like, 'cos you said you get a taxi to the shops.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How do you get back and forth to uni?
Participant: We're right across the road so I walk.
Interviewer: Oh that's easy!
Participant: But like last year we lived about a thirty minute walk away and I still walked then, so I don't mind walking at all.
Interviewer: You walk to most places you think, you could quite easily do that.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, like the only time I get a taxi, like I'll walk to the shops and then get a taxi back with all my shopping. I sometimes like get the bus to places if it's a bit far to walk but if it was like under thirty minutes to walk then, yeah, I'd usually just walk it.
Interviewer: Is it just because it's easier?
Participant: Yeah, it's easier and I suppose you get a bit of exercise and, you know, the bus is usually late as well, so at least I can leave when I want to leave and not have to wait for anything, so yeah, I walk most places really because I don't have a car.
Interviewer: How about eco-friendly cleaning products? Do you ever buy those?
Participant: No I can't say I do to be honest, I just buy like normal cleaning products, I've never really thought about them.
Interviewer: And how about organic foods, do you buy those?
Participant: No not really. I suppose we just go for like the cheap veg and stuff like that, like I know it's probably better for you but I don't really buy organic at all.
Interviewer: That's fine. So when you've been completing the diary online, have you noticed anything about your environmental behaviours?
Participant: I don't [?? 39:31] thinking during the day one of the questions is like 'do you use public bins' and I was like 'yeah I do quite a lot actually', you know, when I'm out, I make sure I put something in the bin and it was, you know, every time I was near enough ticking it, I was thinking 'oh God, yeah', 'cos if I'm walking places I'll walk past the bin and put something in it, but apart from that, yeah, been more aware of what I've been doing and, you know, how they get emptied quite a lot, but apart from that no, not really.
Interviewer: And what would it mean to be 'environmentally friendly' to you?
Participant: To try and reduce the amount of waste you actually like waste! To try and think about stuff like recycling and you know, if you've got the room, like compost stuff, like composting, 'cos I know like me mum's friend does that. Yeah, just to try and have as much an impact on the environment as you can, so yeah, that's what...
Interviewer: Yeah, just literally not creating too much waste.
Participant: Yes. [?? 40:49] waste but just trying to reduce the amount you do waste, yeah.
Interviewer: So how concerned or would you say you are, if at all, with the environment?
Participant: It's just like, like the [?? 41:09] stuff, like that concerns me like with regards to like if there's like a water drought, so then you're like encouraged to use less water but I can't say I worry about the environment that much. I think I'm aware of the environmental issues like not enough room for houses and stuff like that and, you know, people littering, but I can't say I worry about it a lot.
Interviewer: It sounds like stuff that's in your local area.
Participant: Yeah, no I can't say that I'm that involved to be honest, no I don't really think about it.
Interviewer: So would you say it's an important part of who you are, the environment, or is it less important?
Participant: I think it's an aspect, yeah, I mean if you're really wasteful and you don't really, you have no regard for the environment then, yeah, that would make me, make you a bit, I don't know, a bit selfish, but I think if you just try and do little bits then that's OK.
Interviewer: Yeah, just to cut down on your waste.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, yeah, that makes sense, that sounds good. So really the, would it be something that you feel bad if you couldn't have a chance to do, if you had to create waste?
Participant: Yeah, I'd feel bad if I didn't have the opportunity to recycle or if it was made more difficult, I'd feel like if I had to save on recycling [?? 42:38] like a recycling point, then I wouldn't do it that often because I wouldn't have a car to put all my recycling in to take to a recycling point. So yeah, I think because it's made easy I do it, yeah I think I'd feel bad because I'd think 'oh I could have recycled that', like when I'm out if I have a plastic bottle I'll usually just put it in my bag and save it, and either use it again or recycle it 'cos I'd feel bad about throwing it in like a public bin. But like in some places now they have like recycling bins as well so it's not too bad.
Interviewer: Yes, that makes it easy again.
Participant: Yeah, so yeah, I'd feel, I'd feel bad personally if I don't recycle.
Interviewer: So I'm thinking about as well, you know, all the issues in a modern society, like social, economic and health, how important would you rank environmental concerns along with say social and economic problems?
Participant: [?? 43:41] I probably would rank environmental issues lower than social and economical and health, yeah.
Interviewer: What would be the most important one for you?
Participant: Health for me.
Interviewer: Health?
Participant: Yeah, I'm a student nurse actually.
Interviewer: Oh right, oh I see.
Participant: Yeah, so that would be the most important to me.
Interviewer: That makes sense, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think, thinking about, like I say, the economy, do you think there should be more importance like the economic problems first before we got to environmental problems?
Participant: I don't know because at the end of the day if we don't have an environment then you can't live, so I suppose economic, you know, problems are important as well but if we don't look after the environment then I suppose in like 200, 300 years then we might not have much of it left. So I think it should be more important but it isn't, because I don't think people think about it that much, I think they think if it's OK now, if the environment's alright for me then that's all that matters.
Interviewer: And worry about the day-to-day sort of things.
Participant: Yeah, I don't think, I don't know, I don't think the environmental issues get really much coverage in the media, as much as the rest of the other issues.
Interviewer: So you think, yeah, definitely, 'cos if it's mentioned more in The News, say problems with the country.
Participant: Yeah, but I don't think, it does get mentioned but not as much, but I think it probably should get mentioned more but it's not what people may be interested in.
Interviewer: Yeah, so they'll be interested in like, you know, economic problems more 'cos it's.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, do you think it would change people's views if The News started talking about the environment more?
Participant: I think if it would if they gave like statistics on, I don't know how many plastic bags are used or how long it, you know, it takes to get rid of 'em, 'cos I mean I'm sure we've heard some statistics but you don't hear it regularly, so if you heard the environmental factors about the all the issues going on we need to start doing this, then people would think about it more, you know, if it was in the newspaper more, on The News, yeah.
Interviewer: So how about yourself? I mean do you feel like you have enough information about the environment?
Participant: I don't think there's enough in the newspapers or in the media, no, because I think there's more about celebrities or, you know, reality stars which, you know, I don't really care about! I'd rather read about the environmental issues to be honest but it's not what most people want to read about, so I suppose they just want to make money and maybe they do that with environmental issues.
Interviewer: What would you prefer to read about, would it be things like how to help the environment or information about the environment?
Participant: Yeah, like [?? 46:44] statistics because I think that shocks people, it shocked me, and then I think 'oh well, if I start doing this then that might help a bit' or 'if I started doing this'.
Interviewer: Like the impact of what a plastic bag may and stuff like that.
Participant: Yeah, definitely, I think statistics are really important and when you start, yeah, if you could just give the statistics and you don't [?? 47:08] any ways out people won't really know what to do. So yeah like easy steps you could follow but I think they'd have to easy at first because, you know, until people got used to 'em because if it was something you had to go out your way to do a lot I don't think people would do 'em at first, so [?? 47:29] like easy steps.
Interviewer: Yeah, to get them used to the idea.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So how about yourself, I mean do you feel like, it sounds like you do a lot of recycling at home, do you feel that you can, or you would like to do more but you can't?
Participant: I mean I think recycle and stuff like that, if I had the information to do more then I think I would, but at this moment because I don't really know what else, you know, to do, or I've not been given any more information then I think I wouldn't do anything more now, I'd just carry on doing what I'm doing but if I was provided with information then I might feel obliged to do a bit more, but at the moment, no, I just think what I'm doing is alright!
Interviewer: Yeah, so what you're doing is, you know, you're doing your bit to reduce your waste.
Participant: Yeah, it's adequate enough I think, yeah.
Interviewer: OK, so I'm gonna talk now quickly about the local neighbourhood that you live in.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what would you say, if any, are the main problems in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Definitely litter, because there's a lot of students around where I live because I live right next to the university, so I do feel like people my age don't have a lot of regard, you know, for litter, I do think they just throw it and stuff like that, they don't really think about it, so that bothers me a lot because like there's always litter blowing around and stuff like that, it's just something I really don't like.
Interviewer: Is there any particular types of litter that you see around?
Participant: Do you know, plastic bags actually! Yeah, plastic bags and bottles and stuff, I just think, yeah, that's like easily recyclable or, even food waste sometimes, you see all sorts round here. What else environmental?
Interviewer: Are they student flats then where you live?
Participant: No, we live like in private flats, because I'm in my last year so we've just moved here, but there's quite a lot of accommodation, you know, around it, student accommodation, so I think that's like I live where most of the students live, so you know, you do see a lot of like typical student behaviour! I don't know, the parks are alright around here, just the litter I think, yeah.
Interviewer: And that's actually the most of my questions I have, so do you have anything you'd like to add or anything you want to clarify that you mentioned in the diaries or in the conversation today?
Participant: Not that I can think of, I don't think there's anything specific in the diary that I want to mention. No, I think that's it.
Interviewer: OK, no, that sounds fine.