Interviewer: Did you hear back by the way, about the diary?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Oh right, one second, let me just check with the colleague.
Interviewer: Yeah, everything’s absolutely fine with the diary.
Participant: Oh excellent, lovely…
Interviewer: So thanks for that.
Participant: Not a problem, you’re more than welcome.
Interviewer: Everything’s gone through.
Participant: Fantastic.
Interviewer: So today we’re going to be talking a little bit about some of the things that you mentioned in the diary and just going through it in a bit more detail and getting you the chance to put it in your own words, so do you have any questions to begin with?
Participant: No, not really, I think everything was fairly straightforward, so no, nothing that’s, anything that I was unsure of or anything that I would need to ask questions about, no, everything seemed to be fine, seemed to go through okay.
Interviewer: Good stuff.  So how did you find it, how was it completing the diary for you?
Participant: It was very interesting because obviously the questions in some of the answers and some of the topics you wouldn’t normally associate when you went shopping, especially when like myself I’ve got a local Morrisons so you either do your weekly shop  at the end of the week or you maybe just go in for top-ups and things, or if you’re going into town, because of the survey what was happening was if I was going into town I would start to use one or two different shops that I normally wouldn’t go into, just to see what stuff was on sale, anything that they sold, was it different to Morrisons, so it was actually something that I probably wouldn’t have thought about doing if it wasn’t for the survey.
Interviewer: Oh right, and were you looking for different items for a specific reason?
Participant: No, I think it’s probably just the sort of same usual everyday items that you would get, and just to see as most of the places sell not exactly the same thing like bread and stuff that’s you know, they would maybe have their own places where they get it from you know, just your sort of core products that you will get every day just to see if they had them cheaper or if they didn’t have that particular brand if they had their own brands or similar brands and were they cheaper than what I was currently, or used to be getting you know?
Interviewer: Oh right, that’ very interesting, oh I see, and you were just looking for a different variety?
Participant: Yes, uhuh, yeah and then obviously friends had said to me you know, if you’re in town you should try Lidl or you should try this or you should try that, so I would go in and have a look around and see what sort of products they sold, what sort of prices they were at and basically as I said, if it was like everyday food or if it was fruit and vegetables, or if it was meat or something, if they didn’t have the exact same named product they had a different you know, name for sausages or different companies or some of the Lidl brands actually come from Germany, and it was a case of well I might as well try them, they’re a good bit cheaper than what I would normally get, and actually I found that some of the stuff from Lidl the quality was actually, particularly from the meat side, the quality was actually better than Morrisons which I found quite surprising.
Interviewer: Oh wow! And did you find any difficulties with completing the diary?
Participant: No, no, absolutely not a problem, no, no, everything was fairly straightforward in that position, the questions  were fairly straightforward and then you just gave your answers as to what you bought that day and why or whatever, no I think everything was not a problem at all.
Interviewer: Brilliant, great stuff, and did you find anything surprising when you were completing the diary about your behaviour?
Participant: Yes, if like myself if you don’t drive and your local shop’s only a 10 minute walk away you’re actually sort of a missing out on the opportunities to try other stores who for example, like Lidl or Aldi, or maybe some of the bigger stores like Asda, they’ll have different offers on, they’ll have special offers on and the main thing was that they you know, although the products would come under you know, maybe sausages or breakfast cereal or something else or something else, it might be different companies that you’re, products you’re using, but basically it’s the same basic thing, so therefore you went on what the price was you know, if it was say like for example if Lidl was selling a packet of 8 pork sausages that was a different brand to what Morrisons were, but they were 50p a pack cheaper, and you took them home and you thought well at least what I’ll do is I’ll try them and see if there’s any taste difference and see if it was you know, a cheaper quality that would be 50p cheaper that you’d think yeah, okay they might be cheaper but they’re not as tasty or they’re not as nice as the ones that I would normally get, and some of the products as I said were actually cheaper in Lidl but they were actually better than what the brand that Morrisons were selling.
Interviewer: Oh interesting, okay, that’s great, thank you very much.
Participant: No, you’re welcome.
Interviewer: So we’re going to talk a little bit now about the shopping routines, give a little information about that, but could you describe your typical food shop for food?
Participant: It would normally be maybe do a main shop on a Saturday and if there was things that you could put in your freezer that were maybe on a special offer that week then you would maybe buy 2 or 3 packets of them, for example Morrisons are doing a deal just now here you get a pack of 4 chicken breasts but they’re like either covered in batter or covered in breadcrumbs, and they were doing a pack of 4 for half-price, so it would really be the case of you maybe buy 3 or 4 packs and put them in the freezer, and then the rest of the week was just a case of just topping things up, if you needed milk or bread or maybe biscuits or something like that, and then when you were in if you saw something else that was on a special offer you’d maybe take it and try it, so that would be sort of a fairly standard weekly routine.
Interviewer: Yah, so you’re looking out for these offers a lot of the time?
Participant: Yeah, oh yeah, definitely, yes, absolutely.
Interviewer: And with the main shop where you said you get all the frozen stuff, is that at Morrisons?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So Morrisons is pretty much your main shop, the shop that you go to?
Participant: Only because it’s less than a 10 minute walk from my door, yes.
Interviewer: And you said you didn’t drive?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Can I ask the reason for that?
Participant: I just have never, well I took lessons a few years ago and it wasn’t for me so, some of my surveys will have said, “why did you try this and why did you try that?”, you know, for example, the Lidl shops or the Aldi shops, now they are in the city centre so if I was meeting some friends for lunch or I was in the town for a particular reason then at those times, there’s also a Sainsbury’s, so at those times, and a Marks & Spencers, I’m just trying to remember the receipts that I’ve got, so you would go in there and you would see what they had to offer and if they had any offers on or if they had any different brands of the same type of food that I could compare to Morrisons that’s, which I wouldn’t have done if it hadn’t have been for the survey, I’d have gone to Morrisons, gone into town and then just come back and if I was needing a top-up I’d have stopped off at Morrisons on the way back, so I’m not saying that the survey you know, forced me to go shopping, totally the opposite, but it reminded me that you know, sometimes your local shops are maybe not the best because you’re restricting yourself to you know, their brands and what they have to offer, you’re limiting yourself to going to see other places if you’re going to be in the city centre, which is about a 10, 15 minute bus ride away.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, and when you’re doing a shop do you take a shopping list with you?
Participant: Yes, on the main ones, yes, yes, on the ones that are kind of top-ups no I don’t, but then you find as I say, if you’re going in for maybe milk and bread and biscuits and margarine, if there’s other stuff that’s there that it something that you would normally use and it’s on offer then you’d come back with that as well, so even if you’d just taken a wee shopping list and put those on it you’re still coming back with other things that weren’t on the shopping list.
Interviewer: And is it just yourself that goes shopping?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And how much, it sounds like you get your main shop and you get lots of little top-up shops, would you say that any of the food goes to waste, it doesn’t get used?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: About how much would you say?
Participant: As a percentage of the 100%?
Interviewer: Whatever would be easiest for you to describe.
Participant: I would say that maybe, maybe about 10%, maybe a couple of tomatoes that you’ve bought a pack of 6, or a couple of slices of cold meat that there were maybe 4 or 5 slices and you’ve used some of it and then you go the fridge 3 days later and you realise that you have to throw them out because you hadn’t used them, things like that.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay that’s grand, and now thinking about the shopping but thinking about bag use, first off can you, and this is a slightly odd one, but could you think of 5 or so words or expressions that come to mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: The first word that comes to mind is cheap, then, what else could I say, handy, some of the ones that you can get from different shops they’re a bit lightweight, they tend to break a bit easily, and another word would be, I’m trying to think of the one word where you know, that you can’t get much in them, so they’re, yeah, they’re probably quite small.
Interviewer: And as a slightly different question as well, do you remember the first time that you came across supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Oh now, that would have been probably, oh now that’s a good question, it would have been maybe a couple of years ago, I would think, because I remember using them you know, well certainly quite a while ago, for quite a while now, yes.
Interviewer: Was it, is it a bit of a distant memory is it?
Participant: I would probably say maybe the past few years.
Interviewer: Okay, what did you notice before?
Participant: No, not really because before then if I was only getting a couple of things I would just, I would either have in a bag but then recently maybe in the past year or so I had bought a few of those, particularly from Morrisons, the 12p bags for life which are bigger and have got handles and they’re stronger, so anytime I normally go to the shops I normally just pop a couple of them in my pocket just to be on the safe side.
Interviewer: Yeah, and that’s what you use now?
Participant: Yes, all the time.
Interviewer: All the time?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: You never leave the house without them?
Participant: Well on the rare occasions, once or twice and then you have to you know, spend the 5p or maybe spend 20p getting 4 of them depending on what you‘ve bought.
Interviewer: And where do you keep the bags, are they kept at home?
Participant: Yeah, in the kitchen, yes, hanging up.
Interviewer: Oh right, and they’re ready to go when you go shopping then?
Participant: Yes, next to the keys, so you can’t forget.
Interviewer: That’s clever, what is it, you touched upon it briefly, you said you find the handles are stronger as well?
Participant: In general it’s made of a lot stronger plastic and I think they’re kind of a, I don’t mean sewed but they’re reinforced at the bottom so for things like maybe if you use on to carry your milk and your juice and things like that then you can put the other couple of things into another one and they’ll hold up a lot better than the cheap 5p ones till you get home.
Interviewer: So you don’t really use the single use plastic bag ones?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Only in an emergency would you say?
Participant: Exactly.
Interviewer: So why do you think the bags for life are named that way?
Participant: I think that’s because what they’re intended for, if you, like myself, if you just get into the habit of using them and taking them with you all the time, I suppose another, if I’m thinking about it, another good thing as far as the supermarkets are concerned at, if you’ve got them with you and you’re either walking or you’re on a bus the name of the shop’s on them so it’s good advertising for them as well because it’s like Morrisons, it’s got Morrisons and a wee pattern all over them, so it’s got the name of the shop on them as you’re walking down the street, so I suppose it’s also a form of advertising for the supermarkets of the bag that you’re using you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you mind that, do you mind having…
Participant: No, not really because they’re only a couple of pence dearer than the wee cheapy ones, and they do, they do last you quite long, I have to say, as long as you remember, not to, well when you do a regular shopping as long as you don’t remember to overload them and keep them within their capacity they’re fine, they’re absolutely fine.
Interviewer: Have you had any of them break on you?
Participant: Yes, a couple of them, it was because whatever I had put in had some sharp edges and by the time I’d got home it’d actually gone through the other side, so it wasn’t a, you know for example if it was like some of these wee things that come in packages for the loo and they’re quite sharp and then I’ve got home, maybe bought a couple of them, got home and it’s maybe torn a 6 inch hole in one of the insides of the bags, and depending if it’s high up close to the handle you can still get away with it because the middle to the bottom you just have to get rid of them because they would eventually give out on you.
Interviewer: And how did you get rid of them can I ask?
Participant: Use them for some rubbish and then put them into the proper bin bags and then into the proper public bins that they’ve got down at Morrisons, so they’ve got all different ones for you know, paper and glass and tins and all that stuff, so normally just down there.
Interviewer: In the store they’ve got those things have they?
Participant: Yeah, just outside in the car park, yes.
Interviewer: Oh I see, that’s fair enough, and I forgot to ask as well, do you normally take those bags when you’re doing the little top-up shops?
Participant: Yes, all the time.
Interviewer: Oh it’s next to the keys so you always remember.
Participant: Yes, not that us Glaswegians are skint flints you understand, about the 5p but it does help. [Laughter] I’m not wanting you getting the wrong impression of us.
Interviewer: No, no, believe me we’re open to all point of view.  So can I ask as well, so you use the bags for life when you go shopping, how about bins around your house, what do you line those with?
Participant: The ones that we get from the shop are the big green heavy duty ones that have got the tie handles, so you can get a couple of your full black bin bags into them and we’ve got a big bin at the side of the house, which also we’ve got about 3 or 4 other bins, just like Morrisons, for paper and for glass and for cardboard and stuff, so you would put whatever it was that you’ve got into there.
Interviewer: Okay, that sounds great.  You touched upon it quickly, talking about the plastic bag charge, so could you describe to me what you understand the plastic bag charge to be?
Interviewer: And is that for all bags?
Participant: That’s just for the wee skinny ones that are at the counters.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the 5p charge?
Participant: At first I was, at first like everybody else I think there was a sense of outrage but you’ll probably correct me if I’m wrong but as far as I’m aware the government saves that money up and gives it to charity, so if that’s the case well you don’t mind paying the odd 5p.
Interviewer: But initially you felt that bit of outrage?
Participant: Yeah, thinking oh here we go again, we’re now getting charged for plastic bags because we thought it was the, it was a thing that the supermarkets had all sat round a table with and discussed, we didn’t realise that it was actually a government thing and the money was actually going to charity, we just thought this was, how come you know, the big supermarket companies, they’re getting your money anyway by you using them for your food and then they’re going to charge you for taking it home, so until a lot of people realised that actually it was nothing to do, and the money doesn’t go to the supermarkets there was quite a bit of outrage about it, everybody was moaning and complaining, definitely.
Interviewer: Yeah, but when did those views change you felt, when the charge came in or when you heard about this charity?
Participant: When we heard what the money was going towards you’re thinking well that’s fine, that’s fair enough.
Interviewer: And do you know what charities they go to?
Participant: Not a clue.
Interviewer: And I guess in your experience did you find, how did you find it when the charge came in?
Participant: Originally?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: The same as everybody else, you’re thinking oh this is you know, charging for bags this is not on, especially for things that you take for granted like if you go into, if you’re coming home from town and you’re getting a takeaway or getting a fish supper or something and they’re charging you £6 for the fish supper and 5p for the bag, so it did sound a bit you know, as I said everybody thought that the shops and the supermarkets were doing this and they were getting the money until I think it was a few adverts that were on the television and said by the way, and somebody somewhere must have had an awful lot of complaints and they decided to do it, and then there was adverts in the papers saying, do you know that the government’s collecting this money up and the money goes to different charities, it’s not for the supermarkets, you see, so that’s how we found out about it.
Interviewer: Do you think it could have been advertised a bit better?
Participant: Definitely, yeah, it was just a case of one day you found that this, from the Monday this charge was coming on, you were to pay for your, and everybody was talking about it, “imagine paying for your bags”, and then obviously maybe about a few weeks later they were saying, “ah but wait a minute, it’s actually for charities”, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely changed your views then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Did you find it surprising when it came in?
Participant: Yes, yes, I think so, yeah, definitely, I just, I just think it’s something that we weren’t expecting.
Interviewer: And you hadn’t heard much about it beforehand?
Participant: No, not at all, I think that was the problem, it wasn’t very well advertised, even the people in the, that worked in Morrisons, you go into your local one, you get to know everybody that works there, and even they were saying all we know is everybody’s giving us a hard time because they think that we’re charging for the bags and the money’s going to the shops, but they’re not, it’s something to do with the government, and we were thinking, ah, that’s an excuse, that’s an easy thing to say, and then as I said maybe about a month later when it was all advertised and in the papers you were thinking, “oh my goodness, they’re right enough”.
Interviewer: So you might have also heard the England will be introducing the 5p charge from October, next month.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: How do you feel about England introducing it?
Participant: Well I guess, trying to bite my lip and not be very political here…
Interviewer: You can say whatever you want.
Participant: If everybody’s so keen for Scotland to stay as part of Great Britain then why should it just be the Scottish people that’s paying it, why shouldn’t it be everybody else, because everybody else is using them so it’s a bit unfair to just charge the one part of the country, you sound far too young to remember Mrs Thatcher hitting us with the Poll Tax and the Council Tax, I’m not going to be on my soapbox, so you know, it seems grossly unfair if Scottish people are to pay 5p or 12p for bags and none of the rest of the country’s doing so, if they’re bringing it in in October and it’s more money, in the first instance if it’s going to bring more money to charities then all the better, so I think that’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely, and for that sense of equality as well.
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: Definitely.  So what do you think the main purposes behind the plastic bag charge were?
Participant: Probably because, well I would think, I would like to think it was the government doing their bit because over the years you would see on the main news some head of some charity saying you know, there’s all these different charities and there’s all these, especially now with all the carry on just now with the refugees and people coming over on boats and getting killed and all the rest of it, there’s so many things and so many different ways that the charities can depend their money now that they must be running out of them quickly, and some of them are maybe on the threat of closure, if they haven’t closed already, so if the government is using this way of sort of funding some of these to keep them afloat then you know, that’s all well and good, I just think there would be, they would be verging on the unpopular if maybe in the next year or two, or maybe even before that that they said because we’re doing this and the reason we’re doing it is for the charities and stuff, we’re putting it up to 10p or 15p or 20, I think then they would get a lot of opposition to it, I think at the moment it’s fine, people don’t mind paying for it because of where the money’s going.
Interviewer: Do you think if they increased the price too quickly?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you think they could increase the price in the future?
Participant: Well they have an opportunity, although I don’t think that they would do it, I think it would be rather silly, but they have the opportunity if they are rolling it out across the rest of England they could say and it’s going to be 6p and so that everybody else that’s going to be an extra 1p or something, well that I don’t think people would mind, but if they’re going to say they’re rolling it out across the rest of the country and from the first Monday in October it’s going up to 10p I think a lot of people would have a lot to say about it.
Interviewer: I mean do you think say in 10 years’ time they could increase the price then?
Participant: It probably will be about £1 a bag by then, and that’s partly joking, partly probably true the way that we’re going the now.
Interviewer: And did you find after the charge came in in Scotland that you noticed any differences in your behaviour?
Participant: Yes, obviously it made you think about it and then that’s why you would do a sort of a main shop and then you know, your top-ups, you would take your bags for life with you, whereas if you’d, when they were free you would just you know, take 4, 5 or 6, you’d maybe find 2 or 3 that were stuck together when you got home and stuff, but now that they’re 5p it certainly makes you think about it, yes, I would say that that was the biggest difference.
Interviewer: It makes you think about the bags that you use?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Does it make you think about the shopping itself, or would it be more about the bags?
Participant: Probably 70/30 because you would then think well I’m taking my couple of bags for life, I’ve got my wee list but in case there is always something that’s there or you’re buying that not on your list, then it actually, it’s better not just having the wee bags with you, it’s better taking you know, two of the bags for life just to be on the safe side.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you had to plan a little bit ahead?
Participant: Yes, whereas previously you didn’t.
Interviewer: Do you notice any changes around where you live at all?
Participant: In what respect, sorry?
Interviewer: The local neighbourhood and the people that you know, did anybody react in any sort of ways or they made changes?
Participant: Yeah, mostly the same, most of the people that I speak to in Morrisons have done the same, they’re very conscious of obviously I would just go through the 4 wee tills that are for maybe 10 items or less and that’s where some of the bags are, and speaking to people that you kind of bump into on a regular basis everybody’s more conscious, in fact most of the people that I see actually have got in their basket or are walking around with the bags for life, definitely, that’s something that I’ve definitely noticed, there’s been a big change.
Interviewer: So it’s become more popular?
Participant: Yeah, and kind of habit.
Interviewer: Would you say it’s part of your habits now?
Participant: Yes, absolutely.
Interviewer: And how about rubbish in the local area, have you noticed any changes there?
Participant: It seems to be a lot cleaner, a lot tidier.
Interviewer: Oh right, with the absence of bags or other sorts of rubbish?
Participant: They seem to be either using the big green garden bags with the handles because you can get more in it rather than walking past places and there’s ordinary 5p bags wrapped up with you know, right full, just left either in the street or next to the bins that Morrisons have got out on their car park, on the forecourt.
Interviewer: You also mentioned that you go to some smaller shops, so in England when they get their charge there might be some exemptions for smaller shops, so shops with less than 250 staff won’t have to charge.
Participant: Okay, is that going to apply in Scotland?
Interviewer: I don’t think that’s applying in Scotland, only in England.
Participant: Oh, not good.
Interviewer: You sound disappointed.
Participant: Not good, not good, however without being too political if that’s what Mr Cameron and the current government’s wanting to do you fire away, you keep going, you’ll soon know what Scotland feel about that in about 4 years’ time.  That’s a bit unfair if they’re just going to start bringing the 5p charge in in England but then some of the shops with less than 250 staff, which obviously up in Scotland and up in Glasgow where I stay there’s hundreds of, so they’re not going to charge then but they’re still going to get charged up in Scotland then that’s totally unfair, they’re going to get a lot of, they’re going to get a lot of pressure and they’re going to get a lot of angry interaction with Scottish people because it’s not the 5p it’s the principle.
Interviewer: It’s the equality that you mentioned?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you’d be less for exemptions in England?
Participant: Well especially when it’s only 5p, all that extra money could be going to the charities you know, if it was going to the government or if it was going to the supermarket then you know, they can well afford it, it’s the smaller shops that would benefit from the 5p if they were getting it but they’re not so again if it’s going to only be in England it’s, to be honest with you it’s just something else that, I have to be careful what I’m saying to you here, it’s just another tick on the list of the people that are wanting Scotland to be independent can add to the list and say to the people, “you see, there’s the Tories and there’s the government again, it’s okay for England, they’re not paying this and they’re not paying that but we’ve still to get it in Scotland”, so it’s all going to add to the general opinion and the general feeling of Scottish people that as far a lot of people are concerned the Tories treat the Scots as second class citizens, and that’s just the way that it’s been for years and years and years, and this is just another part of that you know, I would imagine that the small shops that are of the same equality in Scotland as are in England who are, they’re you know, they’ve to charge for the bags but those in England have not to, will be a wee bit upset about it as well, so no, I honestly don’t see what their thinking is, I really don’t see what their thinking is.
Interviewer: Absolutely, and just for the record, can I ask you views on Scottish independence?
Participant: Yes, Yes, Yes!  Did you guess?
Interviewer: I guessed as much but I wanted to be clear.
Participant: It’s just I think that for years we’ve either had, well no, since we had, which has been a long time ago now, since we’ve had almost 99% of Scotland was covered with Labour and we had Labour governments, since then, since the Thatcher years we have  had governments up here in Scotland foisted upon us of one you know, one, either Labour or Tories that we didn’t vote for, so I honestly, I don’t think that we could, and to be honest with you I don’t know how much you know about it but last year’s Scottish Referendum was a joke, there was so much scaremongering and so many lies told by the No campaign that it was absolutely, it was actually frightening, it was frightening, and then banks were saying the next day when it was a No vote, “of course we wouldn’t pull out of Scotland, but we couldn’t let the public know that and blah de blah de blah”, there was a lot of very negative scaremongering coming from the No campaign.  When David Cameron announced that if the people of Scotland stayed with the UK that he was going to do this, this, this and this, a year later he’s hardly done anything, so I think if there was to be another, there will be another referendum, of that I’ve absolutely no doubt, do I think it’ll happen in the next 5 years?  The way this government’s going I think it’ll be happening in the next year or two, and I think a lot of the people that voted No will have a serious think about it and look and think well, we’ve did what they told us and they’ve not, they haven’t came across with their part of the you know, of the you know, what we’ve discussed with their side of the bargain, so we’ll just vote Yes along with the rest of them, so I think as far as politics go I think, particularly up here in Scotland, I think it’s just a waiting and a watching brief, and then of course the furore, that’s the only word that’s for it at the minute, with this new Labour leader, he’s coming up to Scotland next week to try and win back all the Labour voters from the SNP, well good luck to him!
Interviewer: Thank you very much, yeah, absolutely.
Participant: Sorry if I’ve side-tracked you there.
Interviewer: No, no, that’s alright, we need to get these views, but I am going to shift back slightly here and talking about some behaviours that you might or might not do around the house.
Participant: Sure.
Interviewer: So do you save water at home?
Participant: As much as possible.
Interviewer: What sort of things do you try and do to save water?
Participant: Well you would just put in enough water for, if you’re making a cup of tea you know, you wouldn’t fill the sink up full of water if you were washing the dishes, or if you were doing a bit of cleaning or whatever, you’re quite fairly conscious of the amount of water that you’re using, so yeah.
Interviewer: And how about electricity?
Participant: Well I was always brought up since I was young that you switch everything off at the plugs in case there was a house fire, so if you’re in one room and you’ve been in another room and you switch, you automatically just switch the lights off, as I said going to bed at night you would switch off the television and you would switch everything off at the mains, not just by the remote control.
Interviewer: And that’s something that you’ve always done?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: How about reusing different things at home?
Participant: In what respect?
Interviewer: Any household items that you use once and then maybe give it a wash and use it again, or maybe even somehow reuse?
Participant: Not really, no, not a great one for recycling or reusing, no, and I’ve got this thing about when you buying a packet of 20 scourers if I use one for maybe washing the dishes or use one for cleaning the worktops or whatever, then once I’m finished with them I put them in the bin and use a fresh one, I’ve had, I still have to some certain extent some problems with my tummy so I just think that reusing them you know, with maybe bacteria or whatever’s on them, it’s better just to throw those ones out and start a fresh one.
Interviewer: Definitely, so you want to do that for health?
Participant: Yes, uhuh.
Interviewer: And you mentioned recycling, that was going to be my next questions…
Participant: Oh sorry.
Interviewer: No, no, no, no problem, you mentioned the recycling areas in Morrisons, do you use those?
Participant: I do, yes, yes, and the same at the bins outside, so whatever bins labelled for different stuff then, at first it took a bit of getting used to, especially if you were quite busy, but actually once you split them at the time and then you put them into the separate containers it’s actually a lot quicker and a lot easier than not doing it, if that makes any sense?
Interviewer: Oh yeah, you just want to separate them and then it’s done?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And is that round the house as well is it?
Participant: Yes, yes, absolutely.
Interviewer: Is that the Council then comes and picks them up?
Participant: Yes, every Friday.
Interviewer: Every Friday?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Lovely stuff.  How about when you’re shopping, do you notice sort of packaging on products?
Participant: Yes, I try and get items that have got a lot less packaging, a lot of the manufacturers now you can see with it you know, you’re not getting, say you’re getting a pack of 4 sausages and there was all this packaging and all this wrapping and all this cellophane, now it’s been vastly cut down so I would tend to go for the ones that’s got as little packaging as possible rather than something that’s a wee thing in the middle and it’s all lost you know, in packaging that looks far too big for it.
Interviewer: What are the reasons for that?
Participant: Well they do say that it’s better for the environment and it’s better for not having all these big tonnes and tonnes of waste mountains and piles of that that can be quite unhealthy so, and obviously the less packaging cuts down on the costs so they could probably sell the product a bit cheaper if it was, it still had their name on it but you know, still have basic packaging but just not as much as they had done previously.
Interviewer: Absolutely, is that something that you’ve noticed recently or is it something that you’ve always had?
Participant: It’s probably something that I’ve done without thinking for a wee while but then obviously one of the questions in the survey’s about that so it then draws your attention to it, that you’re thinking oh wait a minute, I already do that anyway and it just reminds you if you’re kind of busy and you’re rushing in to top stuff up and you’re thinking there’s that type of sausage or there’s that type of sausage or there’s this and that, you would consciously go for the on with the less packaging.
Interviewer: Absolutely, yeah, yeah, that’s one of the problems with the diary, you have to ask things and then you remind people.  How about eco-friendly cleaning products, do you ever use those?
Participant: All the time, yes, yes, all the time, eco-friendly or bio-friendly or whatever, never used to, never used to give it a second thought and the main reason for that I guess was because at the time they were a lot more expensive than you know, a cheaper one that didn’t do, you know, for example your washing powder you know, and obviously nowadays you’re doing your washing on a 30 degree cooler wash and stuff, and some of the cheaper ones that you would buy were not eco-friendly but you needed to put in about half the packet so financially it wasn’t working out better, but since you know, the governments, successive governments have mentioning it and this, that and the next thing, the prices have come away down, in fact Morrisons had, about a month ago they had a special sale on some of eco-friendly washing powders and I got a big 7lbs box of one of the more popular brands, I’m saying 7lbs, I’m old school, 7lbs in weight, whatever that is in kilograms, and it was actually cheaper than a smaller packet, a 3lb or a 1.5 kilograms of a cheaper make, so it made sense to get it, and of course you only needed a half a cup full, but then they only have these on now and again and I don’t think it’s so much Morrisons that are doing it, I think it’s the actual companies themselves you know, so obviously they’d be selling a lot more because it’s a good quality product, it’s a well-known manufacturer and it was less than half-price, so instead of getting one wee packet you buy a big one that would maybe last you, I think it said something like 90 washes or something like that on the front of it.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, it’s got to be done then.  Lovely stuff.  And do you support any environmental organisations or issues?
Participant: Not per se, not at the moment, no.
Interviewer: And any charities as well?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Any charities?
Participant: Yes, a couple.
Interviewer: Okay, is that the monthly payments sort of?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: Can I ask what sort of broad category they fall in?
Participant: Mostly either in Britain children’s charities or some of these ones abroad where the water’s not the best for them to drink and all this kind of stuff and you know, a couple of Pounds would get somebody a mosquito net and all that kind of thing, so it’s, not so much to do with animals, more to do with people.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s brilliant, thank you very much.  So could you, in a general sense how concerned with the environment would you say you are?
Participant: In recent times probably more and more, when you know, when you see a programme and they give you the facts about you know, environmental issues or gases or carbons and stuff, and the stuff that’s coming back out, coming out of cars, or even the stuff that’s in the wee thing that’s on the back of your fridge-freezer to keep it going, a lot of things that unless you were educated about you just wouldn’t know.
Interviewer: And it’s something that you said has developed over time?
Participant: Yes, definitely, I think it’s just basically being a sort of a communication thing, and a lot more people realise wait a minute, we’re going to have to do something or else there’s going to be this huge big hole in the ozone layer.
Interviewer: So it’s definitely something that you’ve become more aware of and you want to…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So would it be an important part of who you are, your actions would you say?
Participant: More recently, yes, definitely, it’s like the buying things with less packaging you know, a few years ago that wouldn’t have entered into my head, but with the education and the television programmes it’s bringing the attention to these plights to a far wider audience, absolutely.
Interviewer: So why would you be, just trying to understand the motivation behind environmental concern that you have?
Participant: I think basically, I know this might sounds a bit trite and a bit you know, kind of old school, but it’s in the long-term anything that they’re doing is to save the planet so you know, where we live, so anything that they’re doing has to be a good thing.
Interviewer: To preserve the planet?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is that for future generations?
Participant: Yes, yeah, both, yeah, I guess so.
Interviewer: But you feel like it’s this communication now to realise that we need to preserve what we have?
Participant: Yes, yeah, definitely, because you know, they’re saying if we continue the way we’re going on maybe in the next 40, 50 years we won’t have arable ground to plant potatoes and plant vegetables and stuff, never mind in Africa and abroad you know, like in Europe and America and stuff, so it could get potentially very, very serious, so, and obviously a lot of people, a lot of the environmentalists and like Greenpeace and people like that have been saying you know, that maybe for the past 100 and odd years people are, governments and successive governments have been talking and talking and talking with world leaders and all the rest of it, it’s getting to a stage now where we really, really need to take some action.
Interviewer: Do you think the governments are taking enough action at the moment?
Participant: Not as much as they could be doing but then obviously you know, with this, with the migrant situation and with the price of oil and all the rest of the stuff, they’ve got more than their hands to contend with just now and you know, the threat of Isis and one thing and another, Mr Putin and Russia, they’ve got their, the whole world’s got their hands full, so although the environment’s an important issues I don’t think they’re looking at it as being the single most priority that they have at the minute.
Interviewer: Yeah, if, and this is a challenging, how would you prioritise say the environmental issues again social, economic and the issues like Isis and other threats?
Participant: If you were to rank them out of 10, the environmental issues considering what you’ve just said and what we’ve got to face at the minute would be 8, 9, 10, I think it’s as bad as that, I think there’s other more serious matters that need the world’s attention not just the British government’s and you know, doing their bits and pieces just now in the environment seems to be okay, but in a scale of the top 10 I would say maybe 8, 9 or 10, as low as that at the minute.
Interviewer: As low as that?
Participant: Mhmm, mhmm, just because of everything else that’s going on in the world just now.
Interviewer: So everything else right now needs urgent attention?
Participant: Needs more urgent attention, absolutely.
Interviewer: Do you think that once those problems are, can they be dealt with or would, sorry, something stuck in my throat, would government’s attention then return back to the environment do you think?
Participant: Yes, I think if you could, some of them they’re not going to get solved overnight so that’s the problem, but if they can sort of, if the world can sort of get together and work together with some of them so that they become less of a priority then I think that concentrating on the environment would certainly shoot up that scale.
Interviewer: So how about, and yourself, environmental behaviours, do you feel that you are happy with what you can do for the environment?
Participant: Small such it is, yeah, possibly, I don’t know that there’s any more that the general public can do, I think it’s now in the hands of the powers that be, as I say the leaders of the world not just you know, David Cameron or Angela Merkel, I think it would have to, or Baraka Obama, I think it would have to be a world thing that would make any significant changes a lot more than what people could do on their own you know?
Interviewer: And how aware would you say you are about environmental issues?
Participant: Pretty, because it’s on the news very other day so yeah, more than I ever was.
Interviewer: Would this be television and newspapers?
Participant: Mhmm, yes.
Interviewer: What sort of stories do you normally receive from there?
Participant: You know, just about all the different harmful gases and that’s why other companies are looking at more sustainable and more safer and cleaner renewables like the windfarms and trying to use solar power and hydro and stuff, which I think is probably going to take a bigger, it’s going to be bigger in the future in the coming 10, 11, 12 years, the way that the environment’s going, it’s definitely going that way, how it’s going to be, if it’s going to be provide for, to be too expensive for your general household remains to be seen, but it’s definitely going that way, and I don’t think that’s a bad thing.
Interviewer: These things could be very positive for the average citizen?
Participant: Yes, yes, mhmm.
Interviewer: So with the government helping as well, do you feel like you get enough help from the government to be environmentally friendly?
Participant: No, no, because I think the government’s would be thinking it’s not the top of their priorities and if they do get time to look at it and they want to implement this, that and the next thing, as per usual, I think it’s going to be us that’s going to have foot the bill, that’s going to have to pay for it if we want to be more, take responsibility ourselves and be more environmentally friendly, then I think we’re going to have to pay the government some money to do it ourselves, where it should be automatically done by the government, especially when you know, people are paying their tax and National Insurance and you know, all these other different taxes and stuff that people are paying already, and VAT and all that kind of thing, so I think it’s, as I said at the minute it’s not on the top of their priorities but when eventually the times comes that it will do there’s going to have to be a lot of soul searching and a lot of you know, papers, White Papers coming out about this, that and the next thing, so that’s something else that’s on the backburner that we’re going to have to keep our eye on.
Interviewer: Definitely, is there any sort of things you feel like in your local area that could be improved to help people be more sustainable?
Participant: Not really because where I stay is not all that far from the city centre so it’s pretty urban so I don’t know, some of the schools have got projects on where they’re going into some of the local parks  and they’re you know, planting seeds, they’re planting trees or something and trying to teach the next generation about the environment and about you know, having to protect the environment and protect the trees and the wildlife and the animals and stuff, so I think as far as the local neighbourhood is concerned everything that can be done is being done, as I said everything else is now in the hands of the politicians.
Interviewer: And a couple of very quick questions, how would you, thinking about your local neighbourhood, are there any main problems in your local neighbourhood that you’re aware of?
Participant: In what respect, anything at all?
Interviewer: Anything at all.
Participant: We do get the, this is quite a quiet neighbourhood where I stay and we do get from time to time some of the young guys with their souped-up cars thinking that they’re Lewis Hamilton and they use the main roads at night time as a racing track so fortunately there isn’t a pub near where I stay, there’s a golf club which is obviously rather posh, so we’re quite fortunate in that respect that it’s not too near the town where you get a lot of people coming out the pubs on a Friday and a Saturday night and they’re drunk and you know, wanting to cause trouble or whatever, that’s, doesn’t happen, or it’s very, very, very seldom it’s just rally these young boy drivers, but I think every area has got them to a certain extent, it isn’t every night obviously, it’s mostly at the weekends, but on some occasions if you can’t sleep maybe 2 or 3 o’clock in the morning, you hear them you know, with their souped-up cars going about 900 miles an hour right past your window because there isn’t any other people on the road, especially during the week, Monday to Friday, you’re more liable to hear it you know?
Interviewer: Oh yeah, do you think they go round more, is it quieter then?
Participant: Yes, oh definitely, definitely.
Interviewer: Alright, brilliant, well thank you very much, and that’s the end of my official questions, do you have anything you’d like to add or emphasise?
Participant: No, no, I don’t, I don’t think so. I got an email from, I think it was the end of last week, an email from I think it was a lady called Elizabeth and she was asking for my name and address, where to, I understood at the start when I took part in the survey that the remuneration was going to get put straight into the bank but I think there was some problems with some of the systems and I think last weekend there was a power cut and cut a lot of things down, so she was just saying if you don’t mind Jim, can you give me your name and address and we’ll just get a cheque posted off to you, so as I say that was, I think she said that was last week, so hopefully that’ll come anytime now, and that’ll be fine, I thoroughly enjoyed doing the survey, and as I said it brought a lot of things to mind that you take for granted when you go out shopping.
Interviewer: Oh, I’m glad to hear that…
Participant: Oh absolutely, not a problem.
Interviewer: We’ll be sending out the cheques very shortly, like you say we’ve had some technical problems, but yeah, believe me the cheque’s already written.  Very quickly, I have some quick demographics to ask about you.
Participant: Right.