Interviewer: To begin with can you tell us how you found filling out the diary?
Participant: Good. It was quite interesting, kind of reflecting back on things you don’t really think about during the day. I mean towards the end it got a bit tedious, for the first few I found it really interesting and just see how, it was quite interesting to see the different, how things were different from day to day.
Interviewer: Were there are things that you found surprising?
Participant: Yeah, I think the main thing I found surprising was how much it varied, it wasn’t something I’d really think about, you know, in terms of how much waste and how much like recycling and much waste and how much it did vary, it wasn’t something I’d really thought about before.
Interviewer: And did you find anything difficult?
Participant: Sometimes keeping track of, you know, what I had, because it is something that you just don’t think about as you’re going along and it was sometimes difficult to think at the end of the day, “Well what did I recycle”, and it was difficult keeping track of my husband’s shopping because obviously had to take account of household shopping so it was a bit reliant on him remembering what he’d bought and that was more difficult
Interviewer: That’s cool, well I’m glad to see that it went mostly well. So could you give me a quick description of your shopping routine, your main food shopping routine.
Participant: Generally I do one kind of big shop every fortnight, usually either online at Tesco or I do the Click and Collect, I do the Click and Collect thing or I do the scan as you go along, yeah, because I usually have my daughter with me and she doesn’t tolerate things, supermarkets, particularly well so the scan, the scan as you go thing gives her something to do. And then I do top ups either at the local Co-op or Lidl, you know, some shops that are in walking distance, I do top ups, well, for the fresh fruit and veg in the week. I also get a food cart every week, every Tuesday you get, order in advance a bag of fruit and veg so that kind of keeps me going for the week as well.
Interviewer: So the Tesco is your main fortnightly shop?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, and just kind of get out everywhere locally.
Interviewer: So it gives you more selection?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I’m a vegetarian and it’s quite hard to get things like tofu and Quorn things, you’ve got to, I need to a big supermarket for those, they don’t really have them in the local shops.
Interviewer: Yeah, my wife is a vegetarian as well, so.
Participant: Yeah, it can be quite hard to get.
Interviewer: And how do you normally get there, to Tesco?
Participant: I drive in my car.
Interviewer: And it’s normally with your little one is it?
Participant: Yeah, usually.
Interviewer: Do you ever go with your husband?
Participant: No, not very often, no, only if we’re sort of shopping for an occasion like Christmas or holiday or when I need his input.
Interviewer: How about planning your shopping, do you take a list?
Participant: Sometimes, sometimes I do to the big shop, obviously if I’m doing it online it’s a bit different, I tend to have a list of things that I might not otherwise get so my husband particularly wants something I write that down or if I’ve noticed that there’s something we’re missing I’ll write that down but otherwise I tend to get kind of very similar things each time.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, so you sort of have a basic list and then you build on that, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And with the Click and Collect, how often do you do that?
Participant: That’s you know, once a fortnight, every three weeks, I kind of try and do the Click and Collect but sometimes I’m not organised enough for it when I go to do the shopping but I try and use that as my main shop every time, just because it’s quicker obviously, I don’t have to drag my daughter round the shop but also I find it easier to try because I can check at home if I actually need something while I’m doing the shopping and save me buying random stuff in the shop that I haven’t planned for.
Interviewer: Oh I see, so yeah, it definitely makes it easier than for you with a child under four looking at what shopping you have already.
Participant: Yeah, yeah exactly.
Interviewer: And are there any particular things that you look out for when you’re shopping, you know online or in the shop, any sorts of type of food or any sort of particular things that you would look out for?
Participant: Because I generally buy kind of similar things but I do look out for offers, I suppose sort of three for two or like two pots of yogurt for £2.50 or whatever, you know, things I know we’re going to use anyway, I kind of, you know, if there’s some fruit offers on fruit and veg I’ll change what I was going to buy to buy the offers. I try and sometimes for organic on some things, not everything, so fruit and veg and like Fair Trade bananas try and get for, things like apples I try and buy British ones rather than ones from New Zealand or wherever.
Interviewer: So for the fruit and veg you tend to look a bit more at the details.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I suppose what we mainly buy other than staples but I just tend to buy cheaper branded, you know, like brand type things, you know, pasta and rice and stuff like that, if I can kind of spend less on those and then maybe a bit more on the fruit and veg and that’s when I look for the offers to save a bit of money there.
Interviewer: So cost becomes a factor?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: And how about the top-up shops you mentioned, you pop down to Lidl and Co-op was it?
Participant: Yeah, that’s right.
Interviewer: What are sort of things you normally pick up from there?
Participant: There I tend to pick up kind of certain fruit and veg if I’ve realised we’ve run out in the week and need something for a meal, also things like bread and milk, you know kind of staples that don’t last so long, more kind of basic items I suppose I go to the local shops for. There’s not as much selection there so again most... there’s not much to choose from if I’m going for apples in the Co-op, I’m getting the apples that are in stock and everything, there’s not much to really consider.
Interviewer: And did you say they’re in walking distance as well, did you say?
Participant: Yes, they are, yeah, both of those.
Interviewer: How long a walk is it?
Participant: The Co-op is about three minutes, Lidl is about five to ten.
Interviewer: So you don’t drive to those, you just pretty much walk there all the time?
Participant: Yeah, I definitely always walk to the Co-op, Lidl’s sometimes I stop there if I’m out and about anyway, kind of in the car anyway and then sometimes I walk, sometimes I... I wouldn’t purposely drive there if that makes sense, you know, I wouldn’t drive there if that’s the only place I was going.
Interviewer: Yeah, just on the off chance.
Participant: Kind of if I’m in the car anyway, yeah.
Interviewer: So moving to a couple of questions now about bag use, so could you please tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: Okay, what’s the word? It’s not fragile, but they’re not very good, they break, that’s what I’m trying to get out, they’re a waste of money really, and a kind of waste of resources.
Interviewer: So it’s not a very high opinion of them you’d say?
Participant: Yeah, no I only use them if I literally have forgotten, you know, have no other bags with me and can’t carry the stuff or whatever, so yeah, a waste of money, a waste of resources, kind of handy in emergency, emergency is a bit more dramatic than I mean to imply.
Interviewer: But they can be handy?
Participant: Can be handy, yeah. Rubbish, kind of I always think of them as just polluting our atmosphere, so like I don’t know how to describe that but.
Interviewer: But a bit of a nuisance you’d say?
Participant: Yeah, like an eyesore.
Interviewer: Do you remember the first time that you saw plastic bags in the supermarket?
Participant: Oh, no.
Interviewer: They’re just something that’s been there?
Participant: Yeah, just always there.
Interviewer: So it sounds like you said you use them occasionally when they’re handy, what do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: If I’m going to do the food shop I use those big type bags, bag for life, those big blue Ikea bags, they’re handy, my cupboard is full of those bag for lifes that I’ve accumulated now, they seem to appear, we would have quite a lot and they always appear from well-meaning relative. So otherwise for top up shops I always have a rucksack with me so I tend to just put things in my rucksack.
Interviewer: You always take it with you?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, with my two year old, always need a rucksack full of any old rubbish, you know, there’s always room in there or raisons and cars and things.
Interviewer: How does it work as well with the top up shopping? Ah sorry, yeah the top up shopping.
Participant: Yeah, that’s when I either use a rucksack if I’m not getting very much or if I’m taking a bit more, I’ve always got a little tote bag in my rucksack so.
Interviewer: Oh right, so you can...
Participant: Just put them in my tote bag.
Interviewer: And with the Click and Collect do you pack those yourself?
Participant: Well I always select the non, because you can select, either to have it packed in plastic bags or not and I select the not so then it just comes in crates and then I just transfer them from the crates into the bags for life I have in my boot of the car although some of the items do come in plastic bags I’ve found even if you asked for them not to.
Interviewer: Which ones...
Participant: I’m not entirely sure why it is, sorry?
Interviewer: Which ones are those?
Participant: Sometimes it’s like fresh items, sometimes it’s frozen items but not I’m entirely sure if there’s a system.
Interviewer: So the bags for life you have, you have the Ikea ones and some other ones it sounds like, do you keep those in the house as well?
Participant: Yeah, just in the cupboard under my stairs.
Interviewer: Ah right, yeah.
Participant: And on the way out.
Interviewer: And there’s one in the boot of your car did you say?
Participant: I try and keep them in the boot of my car, sometimes I kind of take them in when I’m bringing the shopping in so I don’t always have them in the car, I tend to just leave them in the house.
Interviewer: And is that something that is part of your routine now with shopping?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely, you know, sometimes I don’t have a bag for life if I’ve just dropped in somewhere and I haven’t really planned to do shopping.
Interviewer: Is it ever a case that you forget them?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, sometimes, not too often, especially if I’m doing a Click and Collect if it’s kind of in my mind to pick them up on the way out. But yeah, there have been times when I’m going somewhere else and going to do the shopping on the way back but you know, then I’d be more likely to forget.
Interviewer: So why do you think bags for life were called that name?
Participant: I’m guessing to do with the longevity of them, just how they’re... they do last a lot longer than the, you know, usage than the normal plastic bag, I think supermarkets, do they replace them if they get worn or something? Yes, they break, I think some supermarkets replace them don’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah. Have any of yours...
Participant: I’ve not had... sorry?
Interviewer: Have any of yours broken?
Participant: Not that I can remember really, not when I’ve used them for shopping, I think maybe when I’ve used them for like moving house and things which they’re probably not designed for but I’ve never taken one back to the shop.
Interviewer: Fair enough, fair enough, I mean you say like occasionally you might use the odd single use plastic bag as well?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is that in an emergency, as you were saying?
Participant: Yeah, if I’ve maybe bought more than I’d intended, especially on the top up shops you know, if I’ve taken my rucksack thinking I’ll get bread and milk and put it in there and then I see a cake or something, you know, anything I can’t carry than I’ll get a plastic bag.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s important then for the shops to have these plastic bags, these single use plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, well I don’t know, that’s a tough one because it’s for convenience, it is handy to have them but I don’t see why they can’t have, you know, the plastic bag for life, you know, why that could be an alternative, you know, if you do need, if you go to the shop and you’ve forgotten a bag, the plastic ones are so much better, you know, not the plastic ones, the bags for life are so much better anyway, so much less likely to break and usually carry more things in them. So I’m not entirely convinced that there needs to be a single use plastic bag actually, you know, as long as there’s an alternative of something you can carry your things in.
Interviewer: There’s obviously got to be something yeah.
Participant: Yeah, there’s paper bags.
Interviewer: Would you prefer to see paper bags?
Participant: Possibly, you know, for just emergency kind of putting a few items in, I think a paper bag might be better, I know they use them in some clothes shops, I’m not sure, I’m not entirely sure how much they carry weight wise or if they got soggy how they would, you know, if you had like a bottle of milk or something that maybe had condensation on the outside, I don’t know how that works within a paper bag, it’s not something I’ve had experience of but um, yeah, if it was a better alternative I think it could work.
Interviewer: But you would need it to be thought about a little bit, investigated first do you think?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, it would need to be durable.
Interviewer: And can I also ask about do you use bin liners at home?
Participant: We just use ones that the Council provide.
Interviewer: Are those the black bin bags?
Participant: They’re bags with a red stripe these days.
Interviewer: Do you use any small bags for like bins around the house?
Participant: Yeah, we use a couple of white, you know, the small bin liners for the bathroom bin and I use some nappy bags and that’s for nappies and for cat litter.
Interviewer: And you buy those separately do you from the store?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And so I’m going to talk a little bit now about the plastic bag charge, so do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: I think they introduced a nominal charge for single use of plastic bags by the Welsh government, I can’t remember when it came in, to kind of reduce their usage but also the money goes to good causes.
Interviewer: Do you know what good causes they go to?
Participant: I think they vary don’t they from supermarket to supermarket, I know one example recently was RSPB, they had like an art installation in Bute Park that they specifically said that it had been funded by the plastic bag charge, I’ve not actually seen much, you know, much information about where the money goes, you know I’ve not seen charities advertising that they’ve had money but that was one particular example that I noticed.
Interviewer: So how do you feel about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s a really good idea, it makes you so much more mindful of, you know, the need to take your own bags because I think, I can’t remember when it came in, I think I remember knowing that taking your own bags to the shop was important, you know even before the plastic bag charge came in but it was kind of an extra incentive to think about it, anyway, it’s some nominal 5p charge really, you know, considering everything else you’re buying, I think it’s a really good idea and if there are causes that can profit from, you know, those times when we do use a single use plastic bag that’s really good.
Interviewer: And what do you think the main motives behind the plastic bag charge were?
Participant: I assume to reduce the landfill and reduce the usage of them because I assume, I’m not.
Interviewer: And did you know that England will be introducing a plastic bag charge in October?
Participant: Yes, I do, my mother-in-law has been stressing about it, she lives near Manchester and obviously she kind of says she’s got used to taking a bag here if she comes to visit but at home she’s stressing about, not so much the food shopping, she says you’ve got to have using bags for life for food shopping but things like clothes shopping, it’s not such an automatic thing to take your own bag. And I think in England, what I’ve heard is it’s more complex, I think different shops, it depends on the size, of how many employees they have, whether they have to charge or something, I’m not entirely clear.
Interviewer: Yeah, shops with few employees they’ll be exempt in England.
Participant: Oh right, that’s it. Yeah, no, I was aware of that.
Interviewer: Do you think, how do you think about that?
Participant: I think it’s really good, you know, when I’ve been to England I’ve always got a bit confused when they just give me a plastic bag without asking because I’ve usually got, you know, a tote bag with me or something so I think it’s really good just to have that extra step just to think about whether you actually need the bag rather than just being given one so I think it would be really good to have it there as well as here.
Interviewer: You think it’s a good way of making people think more about it?
Participant: Yeah, I do, it’s just that, you know, there’s so many things we just take for granted and just become part of our routine like taking plastic bags it’s kind of good to think well do you actually need this or could you have thought about it a bit earlier and brought your own bag, you know it’s part of, you know, it’s just a nominal charge but it’s that extra step of just making you a bit more mindful. I think it’s good to bring England into line with Wales, I think they’ve been a bit slow with it.
Interviewer: So with those exemptions in England how do you feel about those?
Participant: It sounds a bit complicated really, you know, I’ve kind of got used to just having to pay the 5p wherever, here, so I imagine in England it’s probably a bit more confusing, “Oh which shop am I going to today, do I need to take my own bag or will they give me a bag for free, kind of thing?” You know, so from that side and also from, kind the consumer point of view if you’re a consumer in a shop, you know, going “Oh I don’t have to pay for a bag at the shop down the road”, or you know, having to deal with those kind of queries, rather than it’s “Oh it’s just the same everywhere”. I’m entirely clear what the point about, it’s not something I’ve looked into at all but it’s not immediately obvious to me why there is an exemption.
Interviewer: Do you think that there’s any particular shops that you would choose to be exempt from the charge?
Participant: No. Well not that I can think of.
Interviewer: And how did you find the charge when it came here to Wales?
Participant: I don’t really feel like it made any kind of, well it made me think, it made me take the bag, like I said, I’ve been trying to take kind of tote bags and things out anyway but bags for life weren’t, I don’t remember them being such a thing before the charge.
Interviewer: ‘Such a thing’?
Participant: Such a thing, I don’t remember them being around as much or as advertised as, you know as prominent at check-outs and things. Yeah, maybe they were, maybe... when did the charge come in?
Interviewer: It was 2011.
Participant: Gosh, it feels like longer than that, I suppose my lifestyle was a bit different then so I kind of, I didn’t have a baby and that kind of thing, I didn’t have to plan shopping as much, I don’t feel like it had a big impact on me, the only impact it had was making me try and remember my bags.
Interviewer: Did you typically use bags for life before the charge came in?
Participant: Yeah, I did try to but I don’t think I did make as much effort to remember them, which is kind of silly, you know, from a financial point of view it’s not the charge of the plastic bags that is kind of making me take the tote bags or whatever now, but it’s just that extra, the extra step, that extra reminder. I think it’s kind of more, just more aware of it now I guess.
Interviewer: More aware of that you should take bags or?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s had that effect for a lot of people?
Participant: I think so, yeah, probably my circle of friends, family I think so definitely, you see a lot more people kind of go in to the supermarket taking their own bags now.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s the same with [?? 29:15] it’s not the cost that puts them off it’s just a way to make them think about it?
Participant: I imagine it’s a variety of reasons, I imagine the cost could be off putting, you know it’s probably a good thing to avoid paying if you can.
Interviewer: And how about other charges as well, how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to say an extra charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging?
Participant: I suppose the difference is if you were paying sort of 5p more for plastic bottles it would kind of be a bit sucked in by the actual cost of the product so you wouldn’t notice it as much so I don’t know if it would have that same kind of effect as the plastic bags, like you know the plastic bags it feels like something separate you add on at the end of your shopping so it’s, you’re more mindful of it whereas if you were paying like 5p extra on a packet of crazily packaged apples or something you wouldn’t notice it as much or I wouldn’t notice it as much unless there was a lot of publicity around the fact that there was a 5p charge or whatever but I think the actual kind of, I’m not sure it would have the same effect.
Interviewer: So you mean that sort of separate shock at the end?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I think it is that that makes it more kind of stand out, you know, it’s a separate item that you can avoid whereas and the thing with a lot of the fruit and veg, especially if you go in the supermarket, it is, sometimes you don’t have much choice in how it’s packaged.
Interviewer: How about an extra charge on fuel duties if they said the money was going towards the environment?
Participant: I think that would be a good idea, that sounds, yeah, I mean petrol is expensive but I think that, you know, it’s kind of, I think the thing with that it’s very kind of closely linked and it kinds of leads to petrol and the effect on the climate and hopefully it would make you stop and think whether you need, well if this is a necessary journey, you know, and obviously sometimes it is necessary but you know, whether it would make me think do I need to use this petrol, I’m paying more for it and knowing the money is going to a good cause rather than wherever it goes.
Interviewer: That’s brilliant, thank you. I’m just going talk now about some environmental behaviours that you may or may not do around the house. So do you save water at home?
Participant: Not in any big way, I mean I turn the tap off when cleaning your teeth and things, I think it asked in the diary, that’s the kind of thing I remember learning about at primary school as kind of a good habit to get into, yeah I remember very clearly being about seven and learning reuse, reduce, recycle and learning about turning the tap off and turning the lights off and that kind of thing so I think saving water, the things like that I try not to boil too much water in the kettle, I did have one of those energy saving kettle things but it actually started spitting hot water everywhere, so I got a cheap kettle instead. Yeah, so only really small things really.
Interviewer: Are those the sort of things that you’ve picked over time?
Participant: Yeah, oh hold on, I think my daughter’s awake, can we just take a quick break?
Interviewer: Of course.
Interviewer: Hello?
Participant: Hi, yeah, sorry about that.
Interviewer: That’s alright, that’s quite alright. So how about energy saving at home, do you do that?
Participant: Probably not as much as I should, again trying to turn the lights off when not using them, my husband’s pretty hot at that, leave the room and turn the light off. Also that’s kind of something you get into the habit of. I’m not so good at turning things like my TV seems to be on standby all the time, you know, there’s no... if you need to switch it off, you need to turn it off at the plug, you know if you switch it off from the remote it’s not off/off. Apart from that I can’t think of anything we do really.
Interviewer: And how about reusing different things at home?
Participant: Certain things we reuse like newspaper at the moment is in my cat’s cage, he’s in a cage because he’s not well so yeah, we use newspaper for that. Things like jars, we often used to put like paint, used for paint brushes and you know for my daughter. I’m trying to think.
Interviewer: How about looking at different sorts of packaging in the supermarkets, is that something you keep an eye out for?
Participant: It’s probably not really to be honest, I do notice when things like, you know when you get those four apples in a pack that are on like a polystyrene tray and then they’ve got hard plastic round them and then a cardboard sleeve but they tend to be the expensive ones anyway so I don’t tend to look at those, you know, in terms of you know, I’m not considering those kind of items just because of the expense more than the packaging maybe.
Interviewer: Yes, so it’s not something that you see on the stuff that you normally buy?
Participant: No, it’s not something really take much consideration of day-to-day.
Interviewer: And how about recycling at home?
Participant: Yeah, I try and recycle as much as we can and what the Council like us to recycle. I think it’s pretty good that the Council now has kind of restricted the amount of like household waste bags you can use to three a fortnight but they collect the recycling weekly so that’s a good incentive, it’s good to get as much in the recycling bag as you can and try and minimise what you’re putting in the... that’s again something like a little step that makes you a bit more mindful.
Interviewer: What sort of things do you recycle?
Participant: Well things like cardboard, glass, yeah, it’s everything, mostly cardboard, paper, glass, certain types of plastic, those are the main things, cans, yeah, like plastic bottles and things, those are the main kind of things that we recycle.
Interviewer: And how about driving, do you drive often?
Participant: Yeah, well not possibly often, I don’t, I walk to work so that’s, you know, I don’t have to commute, I’d say I drive most days but not every day.
Interviewer: How far is the walk to work?
Participant: It’s only about a quarter of an hour, the walk, so yeah pretty lucky.
Interviewer: And how about driving in fuel efficient ways?
Participant: And so I went a speed awareness course last year and a big part of that was actually how to drive in a fuel efficient way, I was actually quite fascinated by the speed awareness course and it was very useful and I kind of thought we should have done that when we were learning to drive but there we go. Yeah, so it made me, that made me more aware of, you know, like changing gears properly and more smoothly but I find I’m more aware of driving like that when I’m doing like motorway driving whereas a lot of the driving I do is kind of short journeys around town where I’m kind of being more stopped in traffic than you are driving kind of thing. So there are times when I do try and drive fuel efficiently but that’s more if I’m doing like a long journey.
Interviewer: How about eco-friendly cleaning products, do you ever use those?
Participant: Yeah, I buy e-Clover washing up liquid, toilet cleaner, spray on the laundry stuff...
Interviewer: Quite a few.
Participant: Laundry powder, sorry?
Interviewer: Quite a few then.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I think that’s something, a habit I got into when I was a student actually I find it lasts quite well.
Interviewer: It’s something that you’ve done since you were a student, sorry?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, it’s always quite readily available and not more, not a lot more expensive than other product.
Interviewer: What makes you choose this?
Participant: I’m kind of hoping that they’re more eco-friendly, it says that on the packaging but I haven’t read into it very deeply. Also the kind of chemicals and stuff, especially having the little one around, I don’t like having too many chemicals so I wouldn’t want, not that she’s drinking the toilet cleaner or anything, but you know what I mean, just having those chemicals in my house, I’d rather use more, as natural products as I can without having the time to make all my own with bicarbonate of soda and vinegar which I know some people do but I’ve not quite got round to actually.
Interviewer: So what would you define as environmentally friendly behaviour?
Participant: That’s a tough one, I guess it’s got a lot of aspects to it really but I suppose the taking of minimal resources was possibly, you know, using resources as minimally as possible, things that don’t impact on the environment, eco-system, like you know, too many, using too many chemicals and get into water and using too many things that are going to end up in landfill, yes, it’s just about that kind of treading lightly I suppose if that makes any sense. Not using things that can only be used once and then take however many years to degrade.
Interviewer: So would you say you are very concerned about the environment?
Participant: Yeah, no, I am concerned, whether my behaviour always reflects that is another matter but yeah, I think there’s a lot of things we’re doing that we just can’t sustain, you know, the amount we drive and just the amount of things we create, especially having a little one I’m just aware of how much kind of plastic comes into her life, toys from you know relatives and things that kind of get played with a few times and then she grows out of them and, you know, they do get passed on to other people but yeah, some of them just don’t last that well and then they just, if things like come free with a magazine or whatever then they just end up in the bin. What was the question? Sorry.
Interviewer: So you said you feel like sometimes you don’t, your behaviour doesn’t reflect?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, sometimes with other concerns like cost and things and like driving, I know there’s a lot of journeys I do where I could walk or cycle if I had a bike but just for convenience sake I will get in the car. Yeah, that kind of thing but generally I would say I was, I am concerned because I don’t think we can sustain the level of consumption we’re at.
Interviewer: What do you think the possible implications are of not being able to sustain this?
Participant: Well I think I mean if we look at things like water droughts and things in the Middle East, you’re kind of looking at a lot of complex kind of stems from those kind of resource deficits doesn’t it? And you know in the long term are we going to be looking at, you know, okay this maybe is in the long term but kind of violence and people fighting over the resources that we do have left. Also it really kind of has impact on the eco-system, we don’t know where that will lead to, you know, climate change, how that’s going to affect our way of life, you know, the coastal levels and you know, it could lead anywhere, whether it’s too late to change things, I don’t know but it’s scary when you think of, you know, what my daughter’s generation will face and how soon things will change.
Interviewer: So would you say that the environment plays a role in your identity as who you are?
Participant: I don’t know really, it’s something that I’m concerned about but for me, myself, it’s not something I consider, you know, being part of my identity. My husband is in the Green Party so I would say for him it probably would be but for me it’s not something that falls as part of my identity, no, that’s an interesting question.
Interviewer: Oh I didn’t realise that he was a member of the Green Party.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So compared with, and you touched upon this quickly, compared with some of the other problems in the world say like economic or social, health problems, how important would you rank environmental issues next to them?
Participant: That’s a tough one too because I think they’re all so intertwined really aren’t they? Like you know health and poverty and if we’re looking at, you know, environment in terms of, you know, building houses on our green spaces than that impacts on the amount of space our children have to play on which impacts on their health and that usually happens in poorer places but if we were going to separate them I think it, yeah, I think thinking from a long term perspective I think it is definitely one of the most important things because that has potential to impact on all the other areas.
Interviewer: That’s not an easy decision.
Participant: No, I suppose you tend to think of things in little silos really don’t we? But the way we kind of govern, you know Minister for Health, Minister for Poverty, Minister for... but they’re all so closely linked and have such big impacts on each other.
Interviewer: How about the economy, do you think that’s something that should be focused on first or should the environment be considered first?
Participant: I’d say the environment first, I’m not sure we can sustain the level of economic growth we’ve gotten used to, I think we need to change what we consider as prosperous and that might not be terms of wealth, we need to think about in terms of, you know, the environment resources we have and kind of keep hold of them if that makes any sense.
Interviewer: Yeah. Okay so just talking now about, talking about environmental issues, do you feel that you have enough knowledge about the environment?
Participant: Myself, no, I’ve taken a lot of things on here, say I think, you know, like I was talking about e-Clover, you know I’ll buy e-Clover because it says it’s more eco-friendly but I’m not certain if it is or not. Things like, well we use, mostly we use reusable nappies and that mostly because of, you know, heresy from other people rather than looking up any actual research whether they’re better for the environment or not. So I think the knowledge is out there but it’s the same as in terms of research has helped us always separate things, you know, there’s some good of what the agenda might be.
Interviewer: You think there might be some other agendas out there?
Participant: Sometimes, yeah, I mean not always obviously, I think I saw some, there was some study about reusable nappies that might have been sponsored by Pampers or something, you know saying that they weren’t actually more environmentally friendly, you know, that kind of thing. I think for me a lot of it is time, you know going, taking the time to find the credible sources and finding out more which is why I tend to rely on you know, kind of more superficial information.
Interviewer: It’s easier if you’ve got limited time to do that.
Participant: Yeah, yeah because I wouldn’t consider myself as someone who was, you know, I’m more concerned than I am knowledgeable if that makes sense.
Interviewer: How about doing pro-environmental behaviours, do you feel like you have the skills you need to do those?
Participant: In some areas, maybe some areas like, things like the plastic bag charge and things, sometimes it just takes that one little thing to make you think, day-to-day, how can I change my routine to be more environmentally friendly? So it’s not so much lack of knowledge sometimes or lack of skills, it’s kind of lack of real thinking about it really, you know, if something’s a routine, sometimes you just don’t give it the head space it, you know, it needs to change sometimes, you just need something external sometimes to make you think oh yes, how could I do, how could I do this differently? Should I be doing it differently? If that makes sense.
Interviewer: So you think it would be good for the government to do more little things to make people more aware in that way?
Participant: Yeah, I think so.
Interviewer: Other little charges to break habits?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think there’s anything else that the government could be doing to promote environmental behaviour?
Participant: There is kind of scope for more, I mean there’s not exactly the money floating around at the moment but if there was scope for more kind of promotion campaign like things, like the NHS Change4Life kind of programme which is kind of a bit more like, you know, encompassing Public Health, you know raising awareness of the little changes you can make like changing your sugary cereal for porridge or whatever, you know, they have adverts on buses and things, yeah, whether there’s scope for that kind of campaign, it will be all the little changes you can make that won’t impact on your life very much but will have a big impact if we all do it but saying that, I’m not entirely sure there’s money in that kind of thing at the moment.
Interviewer: You think there’s a limited amount of money that government are putting towards these things?
Participant: Well it’s about different priorities really isn’t it, especially on an eco-level I don’t think the environment is particularly up there for them at the moment.
Interviewer: What would you say is the top priority?
Participant: The UK government, it’s all about the economy at the moment isn’t it? And trying to raise that.
Interviewer: So would you say you’re happy with the pro-environmental behaviours that you do at the moment?
Participant: Yeah, I feel I could do more, yeah, I think there’s probably, I could probably do less as well, you know, if that makes sense. You know, there are things, like I try and recycle, try and reuse things if I can, but I think there’s probably always more scope of things to do, I think I could do more, yeah.
Interviewer: Are there any particular areas that you think you would do more?
Participant: I think switching electrics off at the plug is something I’m not very good at doing, so that kind of energy saving, generally energy saving, driving, like I say, it’s often short journeys I use the car for and it’s more often than not it’s because I’m late. Yeah, so like you know, if I was a bit more mindful of that but sometimes it’s just so convenient to jump in the car rather than up to the bus stop and have to drag the buggy on and hope that there’s not another buggy on there, that kind of thing. So yeah, there’s areas like that I think I could do more in
Interviewer: Do you find it more difficult having a little child?
Participant: They certainly consume a lot for such little people, yeah, so I think I was more likely to walk or catch the bus before, walk or, yeah, walk or catch the bus before I had her, had my daughter, now it’s kind of well actually, you know, I have to take more things with me and like I said, taking a buggy on a bus is not always easy. And extra food you kind of make for them but they don’t always eat, so that makes some food waste and yeah, it’s general stuff they accumulate is pretty shocking.
Interviewer: Okay, and thinking about your local neighbourhood, is there any, what would you say, if there are any, what problems you have in the local neighbourhood?
Participant: Generally, I think rubbish and dog poo is one of the big things kind of noticed around here. Lack of facilities like community facilities, they recently closed the local pool and although they are going to open, reopen it, they are going to close the local sports hall which will leave the area without a community sports hall which will mean, you know, things like gymnastics, probably martial arts, those kind of things will have to go elsewhere which means people will have to travel to them on public transport that’s not always that great so they may have to drive or just not go at all, that’s a big problem. Outdoor spaces aren’t great around here the parks that there are, are often  full of dog poo, they’re just basically used as dog toilets and the actual playgrounds are quite old and tired and there’s a lot of rubbish on there, a lot of broken glass so I don’t particularly feel safe to let my daughter run around there, I think that’s a big problem. Around here, I think, I don’t know if it’s more of a perception or an actual thing but you know, a kind of low level antisocial behaviour round here like graffiti. I had someone broke into my house...
Interviewer: Oh really?
Participant: Last year, yeah, he was quite high on drugs.
Interviewer: Oh wow.
Participant: Yes, I ended up with a helicopter and everything, it was very dramatic but yeah, so I think that’s another problem around here.
Interviewer: Okay, well I’m afraid we’re actually running out of time.
Participant: Okay, well actually I’m rambling about the...
Interviewer: Well that’s absolutely, that’s the detail that we need here and we really appreciate that so thanks. Is there any other points that you’d like to get a little bit more detail, a little more clarification on at all?
Participant: No, not that I can think of.
Interviewer: Okay, I’m just going to ask you a couple of quick demographic questions if I can.
Participant: Okay, yeah.