Interviewer: How did you find the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was quite good to kind of think and reflect on right okay, so, on the questions as a whole and just to look back on actually what you do buy and what you do use and stuff like that, it was kind of good to go back and reflect on it and actually have a think about it rather than just it being like a second nature to yourself.
Interviewer: And why did you find it interesting to reflect on those things?
Participant: Just because it’s something that I don’t think of, I just do it, like one of the questions I think was like “did you do this…”, and it was like turn the tap off when you’re brushing your teeth, it’s just something that’s second nature to me and I don’t actually think that it has an impact on anything really.
Interviewer: And was there anything you know, kind of difficult, tedious to write down, or?
Participant: See I can’t actually think of anything that was actually difficult to answer really, it was kind of, to me it was quite self-explanatory, the questions, if you just kind of thought about it.
Interviewer: Okay, so it wasn’t difficult?
Participant: Yeah, it wasn’t difficult.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you in the diary at all?
Participant: That everything I do kind of saves money, like turning off lights when they’re not in use, taking the tap, turning the tap off when you’re brushing your teeth and stuff like that, like it might not save a lot of money but if you think about it it saves a little bit of money somewhere along the line.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, okay and is there anything else that you would like to add to the diaries before we move on to the next thing?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, they were really good kind of as I said to reflect and go back and kind of, I realised that we don’t do a lot of food shopping during the week, it’s kind of one big shop and that’s it.
Interviewer: Well precisely the next thing that I wanted to talk about is maybe your typical shopping trip, if you could describe it please?
Participant: Yeah, it’s just on a Monday or a Saturday, it’s just one big shop and we just write down a list, we don’t stick to the list so you could go in looking for a pineapple and you’d come out with like a carton of milk, we don’t stick to a list it’s just what we see that we think we’ll like, and we plan our meals, my mum and dad work full-time so we plan our meals, we write them down, what we’re going to use and then we just get things that we think we’re going to use.
Interviewer: And is that once a week approximately that you do that big shop?
Participant: Yeah, approximately once a week, yeah.
Interviewer: And is there a particular day of the week that you do it?
Participant: Either a Saturday or a Monday, whatever kind of day, that’s my mum and dad’s less busier days so that’s when they get free time really.
Interviewer: And what stores do you use to buy food?
Participant: Asda because I think they’re coming in the cheapest, Asda or Aldi, or Lidl, because there’s certain things that they do cheaper, like their fruit’s a lot cheaper than like your chain stores like Tesco or Sainsbury’s, Aldi and Lidl are the cheapest for your fruit so it’s kind of fruit and stuff we go to Aldi and Lidl and then like your bigger meals we’ll go to like Tesco or Asda.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to in addition to this big shopping trip also do you you know, need to go for a top-up to buy milk or bread or things like that you know, little bits and pieces?
Participant: Yeah, that’s very occasionally because they just, they buy like the long life milk so that’s like our milk and then they’ll buy a couple of loaves of bread and put them in the freezer, because they do work all week they kind of don’t have time really to go kind of like get little top-up things, very occasionally.
Interviewer: Right, and you yourself, do you ever you know, go and buy things in supermarkets sometimes on your own?
Participant: Yeah, occasionally like if I’m coming from work or college or something and I’m hungry then I’ll go maybe into like a little pound shop or a little pop-up Asda or Tesco somewhere and grab like a sandwich or something if I’m hungry to have later on.
Interviewer: But for the house does it happen to you to buy food for the house?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: And when you and your parents go to buy food what is important to you when you choose the food?
Participant: Something that’s probably got a little bit of a long life, like a date, and something that’s kind of, like chicken, you can use that for a lot of things, like stuff they can use for a lot of things like your meat, pasta, things that you could do a lot of stuff with that you’re not just limited, like a lot of different meals you could make.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and what is less important?
Participant: I don’t really know actually, like, no, I don’t think they kind of, maybe like really, really cheap stuff, like the own brand stuff we kind of stay away from that stuff, they don’t like buy any of that stuff unless it’s for like the dog, but I think that’s one of the main things, like they don’t go near own brand stuff, apart from that it’s kind of whatever we see that we like that we can use for different meals and stuff, that’s kind of the general rule really.
Interviewer: And how do you travel to your supermarkets?
Participant: Car.
Interviewer: By car, yeah, and you mentioned that there are kind of 3 supermarkets that you go to, is there one that you tend to prefer or you kind of go to the 3 ones at the same time or how does it work?
Participant: Well we’ve got a Sainsbury’s that just about a 10, 15 minute car journey so we’ll go there really.
Interviewer: That’s the main one, yeah?
Participant: No, it’s a big one, but then either that or it’s just like if they were going to my gran’s house before, she lives near a massive Asda store so we’ll go there maybe, it’s kind of just, it’s all in the car because we stay in a kind of cul-de-sac out the way a little bit so it’s not kind of within walking distance really, coming back with loads of bags.
Interviewer: And do you go with your parents when they go to buy food or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah I go with them.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate between yourself who buys what?
Participant: Well we kind of split up and I go and get like fruit and stuff, and then they obviously know, they cook so they obviously know what they need to get and stuff, I can’t cook to save my life so they go get their stuff so they know what they need to go get like, they’re like probably like main meals like dinners and stuff, and I’ll just go get fruit and like kind of snack stuff, like I have a little lunch box that I take to college so I go get that stuff and they do the kind of bigger main things.
Interviewer: And do you know if there is any food that goes to waste at your place you know, anything that you are not managing to use and you have to get rid of it, or?
Participant: Yoghurts, yoghurts, and the kind of leftover bits of chicken and stuff, it’s just like the skin and stuff like that kind of just goes in the bin or goes to the dog or something like that, fruit sometimes goes to waste, that you just don’t get round to eating it or using it.
Interviewer: And is there anything like you know, I mean any kind of meals that goes to waste or any you know, products that you bought other than yoghurts?
Participant: If we make like a pasta dish obviously you can’t, obviously pasta swells and gets bigger and stuff so sometimes if we just make a little bit too much pasta like any pasta dish that might go to waste, or things like that, like bigger meals that they’ve made and they’ve kind of misjudged how much we kind of need and they’ll generally go to waste a little bit.
Interviewer: Okay, we’ll move now to a different thing, can I just double check with you because we don’t have all the demographics for everyone, are you 18 or over 18?
Participant: Oh no, sorry.
Interviewer: No, no, we just wanted to be sure we have people at least 18 years old so that’s fine, yeah, very good.  So maybe the next thing I wanted to ask you about is the following, it’s a little bit unusual, if you could tell us you know, when you, if you could tell me maybe 5 words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Well now in Scotland you need to pay for your plastic bag so I kind of bring my own, or we bring our own plastic bags like the long kind of the sturdy long life ones, we bring them, I just generally don’t like plastic bags in general, like especially kind of Primark or Primark bags, they snap so easily, I just don’t like them because there’s been times where I’ve came back from shopping and the stuff has fell through the bottom so I just use the, I don’t like them at all, I use the big kind of long life sturdy bags that you know won’t burst.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you remember at all when you came across plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Probably when I was younger, I can’t really remember thinking of anything specific, just I don’t like them.
Interviewer: And why don’t you like them?
Participant: Because I just think they’re good for your shopping but I just think they’re, in this day and modern age and technology that they’re like plastic bags that rip, that they could invent something more substantial.
Interviewer: What types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: The big sturdy ones, yeah, you know what ones I’m talking about, the long life ones, it’s not the plastic material, it’s like they’re…
Interviewer: Is it woven or something like that?
Participant: Yeah, like one of those ones, yeah, I can’t think of the name of the material but it’s like the ones that are like £1 to buy, I think.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, and how many of those do you usually use when you go shopping?
Participant: Well like 6, 7, 8.
Participant: Yeah, quite a lot.
Interviewer: And is there a reason why you think your parents and you yourself you use those bags?
Participant: Because you can get, they don’t burst really and you can put your heavier stuff in it and they’re a lot, lot bigger so you can kind of pack your food and put it in order and then we use like one for like bottles of juice and bottles of water, they go in one,  a separate one, they go in one on their own and then the freezer stuff, because you can get open of the freezer big bags, so the freezer still will go in there and then just your meat and stuff so it’s easier to kind of arrange it rather than a little plastic bag you just chuck everything in that it goes in a, so like one bag will go where we put our juice and then one bag will go in a certain cupboard and then one bag will go in the freezer and one bag will go in the fridge and stuff like that.
Interviewer: And do you bring the bags directly to the store or do you kind of keep them in the car boot and then you bring things in the trolley and then you pack?
Participant: We keep them in the car, well my mum keeps a few with her, she’s got a big bag for work and so has my dad, so if he gets anything he’ll have a little one in his bag and I’ll have a little one in my bag, we have them, one with us all the time but then there’s more in the car, so we’ll go park, get our shopping and then put our shopping in the trolley and then stand off to the side and pack it individually.
Interviewer: So you first put everything in the trolley and then you park, sorry, then you pack the shopping when you get to the car?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And another thing I wanted to ask you, is there like any difference between when you go for the top-up shopping, what kind of bags do you usually use?
Participant: It was just the same, big bags, because you can get like different sizes so we might just use like a smaller one, but it’s generally just the same back because when you go in for a top-up and it ends being like a full shop.
Interviewer: Okay, and why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because they’re much more stronger and they don’t snap, they’re much more sturdier for your shopping which I think better in the long-run.
Interviewer: And do you think that the use of bags for life matches this name?
Participant: Yeah, yeah I think that’s true, they’re true to their name.
Interviewer: Do you think that most people reuse their bags for life?
Participant: Yeah, well we certainly do anyway but I think, I think most people generally do.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to buy those plastic bags for life you know, those that are better than the single use, better than the 5p but still you know, kind of thin, relatively thin plastic bags?
Participant: We don’t buy them but I think some people might if they don’t want to pay like an extra 20p, 30p for like a bag for life then they might opt for one of them.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you, you or your parents to take the 5p bags from the shops?
Participant: Once or twice if we’ve not got a little bag with us and it needs a bag, like they couldn’t carry it or we’ve not got enough space in our own bags, then yeah, but I just don’t think, I think it’s ridiculous that you need to pay 5p for a bag to be honest.
Interviewer: And what kind of bag, you mentioned that you usually have a small bag with you in your bag, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, it’s one of the little bags for life but it’s the little version.
Interviewer: And what is that like, foldable?
Participant: Yeah, it’s like a little foldable one or it’s one that kind of, you can fold it up and it goes into like a little circle and it’s got like a little string thing that you can pull down and click it on to, so it’s like a little square or a little circle that is so handy because it’s small and it’s quite compact and it can go in like the bottom of your bag somewhere.
Interviewer: And do you like using that?
Participant: Yeah, just in case I go shopping or anything after college or I see like a top or something and I’ve not got enough room in my own bag with all my college work I can just bring that out and put that in there.
Interviewer: And does it have some kind of brand or some kind of drawing that you like on it, some design?
Participant: Mine’s got Frozen, Elsa from Frozen, mine’s got her on it.
Interviewer: I see, is it something you enjoy?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Great, okay, and in your opinion how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Well quite important if you don’t have like a bag with you or you don’t mind paying the 5p, and I think it’s always good to have because I wouldn’t like to think somebody walks out with like a bag of shopping and they’ve not got a bag, so I think they are important to have but it’s kind of just a preference to be honest if you like it or you don’t, if you want to buy it.
Interviewer: And what would happen if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how would you find it?
Participant: I wouldn’t find it a problem because we have our own big bags obviously, but I think other people might, you always get some people that either agree with something or don’t, so I wouldn’t mind it and I think my family wouldn’t mind it but other people might have a problem if they don’t have the bags for life and they don’t mind using the plastic bags and I think it would be an issue, but I don’t see an issue with it.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and when you occasionally get the smaller you know, the thinner plastic bags do you reuse them at all afterwards, after you’ve brought your shopping or not?
Participant: We’ve got like a little bag and we just stick all our little plastic bags in there and it’s just in case like, I don’t know, we just have like a bag of plastic bags , I don’t even know what we use them for, so they’ll go in there or something like, even like for rubbish in one of the rooms or one of the bedrooms or something, like even use it as like a little rubbish bag instead of like a big black bin bag, it’s kind of easier just to stick things in there and then pop it in the bin, either that or just in that big plastic bag.
Interviewer: Do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Interviewer: When have you heard about it for the first time?
Participant: A couple of months ago actually when it came into play really.
Interviewer: Okay, was it just about 2 months ago?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, yeah, relatively, it was relatively soon, and then if you want I think in Primark if you want a bigger bag you need to pay 10p so I just don’t because I think, don’t quote but I think the money goes to the government so I think that they get enough to be honest so I don’t agree with the 5p charge but it doesn’t bother me, it’s not an issue that I feel very strongly about, I just don’t, I don’t pay it because I don’t get it, I don’t get them so I don’t agree with paying it, but if the worst comes to worst and I have to use like a little plastic bag then it wouldn’t be the end of the world paying 5p.
Interviewer: And do you think it goes to the Scottish Government or to the sort of UK Government, whatever it is?
Participant: I think the Scottish Government if it’s only came in in Scotland, I think, I don’t really know anything about politics or the government or anything, but I would put my money on it going to the Scottish Government if it’s only came into play in Scotland, like different if it was like England or Wales or anything then I think it’d be for the whole government, but I don’t quite know, Scotland probably.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that this plastic bag charge has been introduced or not?
Participant: Yeah, I find it so bizarre.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Just because it’s a plastic bag, it’s like a plastic bag, I thought there could have been other means that they could have put extra charges on like, I don’t know, they’ve put bus fare up and train fare which I think it’s ridiculous because train fare and bus fare is very expensive as it is, I thought if they charged extra, I thought that, because I heard they were introducing extra charges and I thought that was on the bus and train fare tickets and then it came out that it was a plastic bag and I just couldn’t stop laughing, I found it so bizarre that it’s a plastic bag, out of everything they could have chosen they chose a plastic bag, I do not know why.
Interviewer: Did you know, sorry, that’s another question I wanted to ask is what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I don’t know, is it just…
Interviewer: Why do you think they introduced it?
Participant: I don’t know, is plastic bags made out of like a certain material or something that costs extra, I really, really don’t know, it’s a no brainer for me, I find it so bizarre.
Interviewer: What do you think happens to the plastic bags you know, after they have been bought and used?
Participant: I think people just put them in the bin or keep them.
Interviewer: Well precisely, if they don’t keep them at home and they put them in the bin then what happens afterwards?
Participant: Do some of them, I think some of them get recycled, like I’m sure there’s shops that bags are recycled or made into like something different, I think that’s what might happen to them because I know we’ve got a certain bin that you put plastic into so I think you pop them in there and then they’ll go to like a certain place or something that they’ll get made into something else, or.
Interviewer: Did the introduction of the plastic bag charge sort of affected you when you know, you came across it in the shops, you came to the shops and then you realised that you had to pay 5p, did this affect you anyhow, how you were using your bags before?
Participant: Well I always use, as I said, bring the little bag but there’s been a few times I’ve forgot it and I’ve paid, I’ve had to use a plastic bag and then the woman just said in a shop, “oh you need to pay 5p for that”, and I was like, “what?!”, and then it was just suddenly like, I just was like, “why do you need to pay 5p for a bag?”, she said, “oh it’s a new charge thing”, and sometimes it’s frustrating if something’s like £20 exactly and you hand them over like a £20 note and I don’t have an extra 5p, like, or I need to use like a 10p or something, sometimes you just don’t have the correct change to give the person.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and you know when you, before the charge did your parents or yourself ever take the thin plastic bags from the tills?
Participant: Maybe, I think we have, yeah, just in case maybe using the bigger bags they’ve maybe just bought an extra couple of items that just can’t fit in, maybe bought like a plastic bag if it’s like a packet or something, little things that can go in a plastic bag in case they’ve misjudged kind of the bags to the food and stuff.
Interviewer: Yeah, but in addition to that did you already use the big bags that you were mentioning?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So anyhow, even before the charges, you were using the big bags, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, before the charge the big bags unless we’ve kind of got too much food and there’s no room left in the big bags then they’ll maybe grab a plastic bag.
Interviewer: And do you think the introduction of the charge has changed your shopping behaviour at all, or not?
Participant: Yeah, because we don’t use the plastic bags, the little thin ones, they’ll even have like a couple of extra little ones just in case.
Interviewer: But in terms of what you buy or where you go, which supermarkets…
Participant: No, no, in terms of where we go or anything it’s just in case, they’ll always have a couple of extra bags but no, I don’t think it’s changed our kind of shopping or habit or what we buy or anything.
Interviewer: Sure, and do you think that when the charge has been introduced you and your family have become more kind of environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: I don’t think more environmentally friendly, I think, I think they said it’s better for the environment to use the bags for life, I’m not quite sure, I think I seen that somewhere, so I think that’s the most environmentally friendly.
Interviewer: And why do you think it is more environmentally friendly?
Participant: I think, I don’t know, I think is it something to do with the material or how it’s made or something like that, I’m not entirely sure, I’m sure there’s a bag for life that’s got like a little green symbol on it and I think that means it’s environmentally friendly, I think we’ve got a couple of them, I think it might just be in the way it’s made or something like that.
Interviewer: Have you noticed any other changes after this plastic bag charge has been introduced you know, anywhere you know, in other people, in supermarkets maybe?
Participant: I’m not quite sure, I think maybe just people use more the bags for life now because I think quite a lot of people have an issue paying the 5p like so I think maybe people are more kind of now are opting to pay, even though it’s a little bit extra they’ll see in the long run it’s better to get the bags for life.
Interviewer: Have you seen any change, I don’t know, recently about the amount of litter on the streets or things like that?
Participant: No, I’ve not seen a bigger change in any litter, at my college because people, I think people forget how to put litter in a bin and it’s everywhere but apart from that no, I don’t see a big, I think there’s always going to be people that just drop litter because they don’t know how to put it in a bin and they’ve not been taught manners, but apart from that I don’t see like a huge change.
Interviewer: And just maybe one, a couple of questions that I wanted to ask again you know, in relation to that and then we go to the next part.
Participant: That’s fine.
Interviewer: Maybe that’s what I wanted to ask about is you know the 5p charge is going to come to effect in England in October and what we would like to ask is, because some places, in Scotland it’s, the charge is everywhere, so every single bag gets charged 5p, or at least it should you know, that’s how it is supposed to work, and you know, when the charge is going to be introduced in England it will be basically some of the bags will be exempt from this charge, for instance the bags in medium-to-small retailers and corner shops, places with hot food and drinks like take food outlets, so these are not going, these bags will not be paid, and also clothing and shoe shops…
Participant: Oh right.
Interviewer: Yeah, and then finally also paper and biodegradable bags are not going to be charged.  Do you think this is the right situation or should all the bags you know, when the 5p charge is applied should it apply everywhere or should these kind of exemptions, exceptions be made indeed?
Participant: I think it’s unfair because in, I know the McDonald’s in Scotland, I went to McDonald’s yesterday actually and she said, “that’ll be 5p for a bag”, and like I didn’t, I thought it was just, I thought like McDonald’s and fast food restaurants and stuff like that were exempt, but I think it’s unfair that most high street retailers like clothing and shoe shops we need to pay 5p, I know it’s maybe Scottish Government and stuff but I think it’s unfair, really unfair actually that we need to pay it but, this includes, the 5p charge in Scotland includes everything, corner shops, everything, the 5p charge in England will be exempt from that we need to pay it, I think it’s unfair.  If it was introduced in Scotland it’d be a different story, but I think it’s unfair that we need to pay it and they don’t, but I understand it is a different government and stuff, so, to an extent, and it’s…
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and how do you think plastic bag charge compares to other types of charges, for instance the charges on fuel you know, the fuel prices would come up because of the environmental issues, how do you think plastic bag charge is compared to the rise in fuel prices?
Participant: Well I think the rise in fuel prices obviously will be a different story because that’s more, I think people would care more about the rise in fuel than a 5p on a plastic bag, I think yeah, if it was between fuel and a plastic bag I think everyone wouldn’t mind paying a little bit extra for a plastic bag rather than fuel or petrol or stuff.
Interviewer: What do you think about another type of charge, it’s actually not like a charge, it’s more a deposit that people would pau a little, few pence deposit people would pay on plastic bottles, so when they buy a bottle drink in plastic they pay in a little extra and when they bring it back to the outlet they get the deposit back, what do you think about that?
Participant: I think that may be a good idea, but I think speaking for myself I’d probably forget to take it back or be a little bit lazy and not take it back and get the deposit back, but I think maybe it’s a good idea because I know especially at festivals like Tin the Park there’s a lot of litter about and the plastic glasses, like tumblers, and there’s a thing that it says if you pick, how many you pick up you get 5p per item, so somebody, I know there was people going round that maybe, it’s very expensive for food at festivals, that kind of try to get the money back they spent on like a burger at like £6, if they picked up, tried to pick up as many tumblers as they can and they get 5p per tumbler to kind of try to get their money back in a way, so maybe that is probably a good idea, the deposit back if they really didn’t, they really kind of were adamant about that, it think then it’d be a good idea.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in Scotland or in Britain in 10 years later after this charge has been introduced, I man the plastic bag charge that we just spoke before?
Participant: I don’t think kind of, do you mean in like Scotland in general?
Interviewer: Yeah, you could think about Scotland if you prefer or you can think about Britain, so basically yeah, what kind of, what sort of thing could be as a  result of the plastic bag charge in 10 years’ time, yeah?
Participant: I think it kind of like might be split, some people will still be really angry or really annoyed about paying the 5p or kind of might just, and then there’ll be some people that bring their own bags and don’t mind, like myself, or kind of people might just get used to the fact that they’re going to need to pay 5p.
Interviewer: Do you think there could be any kind of physical impact at all?
Participant: I don’t think so, no, unless you really feel strongly about it then I don’t know, but I think definitely in Scotland they still might have an issue about paying the 5p, especially when the 5p charge in England if it gets, or when it gets introduced that most things are exempt, I think obviously there might be a bit of a divide there, like why do we need to pay 5p for everything when there’s a lot of things they’ll get exempt in England, I think there might be a bit of conflict there, but I don’t think anything physical.
Interviewer: And kind of environmental changes might happen due to this, or not?
Participant: I think we might become a bit more eco-friendly, people might switch, I know the bags for life, some of them are eco-friendly, I think that, I don’t really know if it would encourage recycling more, I think the bags are recycle friendly I think but I don’t think it would change really anything really eco-friendly or recycling, I’m not quite sure, but I don’t think it’d make a big change really.
Interviewer: Okay, I’ll just ask you a couple of questions you know, of those that we were also mentioning in the diary, so things like for instance what do you do with your household waste?
Participant: The household waste in general I think it’s mostly just food waste or like wrappers or food, that’ll just generally go in the normal bin, but any food waste that’s kind of maybe left from my meals, that’ll go to the dog, or my dad likes feeding this little fox, it’ll go outside to the fox, either that or it’ll just go in the bin and then if it’s plastic whatever it’ll go into the blue bin, we’ve got a bin from the Council that is like green is your normal waste and then blue is like papers and recycling things, so whatever category it falls into, blue or green, it’ll go in that bin, but it’s mostly food waste or kind of just general wrappers and stuff.
Interviewer: So do you usually recycle at home?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think about recycling?
Participant: I think it’s good, it’s more better for the planet, well not the planet but it’s more kind of friendlier but I wouldn’t say we’re huge recycling fans but like my mum kind of is, like if we put, in the normal bin if we put like a bottle or a can she’ll like get angry and take it out and just put it in the right bin, I don’t know, I think she’s just kind of, because do you know what I think it is actually, if you’ve got in your green bin, the 2 bins get taken by the rubbish people on a different day and if there’s something in your green bin that’s recyclable that should be in your blue in they refuse to take it, so if you’ve got an item that shouldn’t be in there then they can refuse to take it and if you’ve got maybe 3, 4, 5 bin bags and the lid won’t shut then you need your bin emptied, but they can refuse to take it if they seem something that shouldn’t be in there, so it’s just in case the off chance you get somebody that says, “oh we can’t take that away”.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you like yourself recycling or not so much?
Participant: I think it’s I don’t really think about it too much, I think it’s just something that I’ve kind of been brought up with that I know what goes in the blue bin and what goes in the green bin, I think it’s something that, it’s not, it’s like a second mature, I don’t really think about it, it’s just something that I do.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, and does it happen to yourself or to your family to buy things like organic food, sustainable Fair Trade, eco-friendly products for cleaning?
Participant: Well my dad’s got gout which is like a medical condition that he needs to buy kind of, he’s not really allowed to eat a lot of meat, so need to eat things that are quite low in fat, so more organics foods, like he needs to at a lot of cherries and it’s like a certain type of cherry he has to buy, it’s more organic fruit and veg like Fair Trade that they’ll buy because they think it’s better quality, and it’s kind of, he can only eat bananas from Fife [Fyffe – brand name?] that’s so weird to me, but he says they taste nicer, so it’s kind of that like food from certain place, especially with him having gout, he has to buy kind of low fat kind of organicy food rather than processed food, so I think that’s it, but I’m just, I’d eat anything.
Interviewer: And is it because of the taste that he does it or for any other reasons?
Participant: I don’t know, I think it’s just the taste really.
Interviewer: He likes the taste, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, and it’s better for him in the long-run that it’s, he needs to check what he buys, like it doesn’t have certain ingredients in it.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, I see, yeah.
Participant: Because that could upset his gout and it’s like he can’t walk and stuff, because it’s like a crippling disease so he has to watch kind of what he eats, so he’s more, my dad’s more the person that he looks at the labels and he’ll like study them because he can’t deal with, he has to take days off work and stuff because he can’t walk and he’s a lorry driver so he’s driving all day and he can’t obviously put his foot on the clutch or anything or stuff like that if his foot is in agony and it swells up, so he has to be careful with what he buys.
Interviewer: I see, sure, and what do you think environmentally behaviour means at all, what does it mean to yourself?
Participant: Kind of what you do, how you kind of, what you recycle and how you think of it, like if you recycle a lot or what you do it’s friendly, it’s more eco-friendly.
Interviewer: And what does it include apart from the recycling if you can you know, think of?
Participant: I don’t really know actually, just I thought, to me it just means like how you go about recycling and if you recycle and what you recycle if you recycle a lot of just a little bit, I think that’s all it really means to me.
Interviewer: Would you say, I mean how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: It’s not a main issue to me, I don’t really know, it’s not like a big, big thing on my mind, I think I just recycle and that’s enough for me.
Interviewer: What does the environment mean to you at all?
Participant: It’s the place we live in, our planet, I’m not very eco friend… not like I’m, not eco…. I am eco-friendly, sorry, but I’m not really like, the planet’s not a main issue to me, like [?? 39:18 break in recording] think about it too much.
Interviewer: Well precisely, if you compare environment to other things, what is more important to you potentially than the environment, if we spoke about you know, like society for example or you know, whatever you can think or, what is more important?
Participant: Oh definitely society, like the conflict like in Syria and stuff like that and the whole Isis thing, I think that’s a more bigger issue to me than the kind of welfare of the planet so to speak, than like eco-friendly and recycling and stuff, and taking are of the planet, I think that’s, like society’s definitely a bigger issue.
Interviewer: And what kind of things in society are important to you?
Participant: Kind of welfare of the people and how countries treat one another and how kind of people have their day-to-day life like school, going to school obviously, and how we kind of take care of each other rather than the planet.
Interviewer: What do you think about the fact that in some places in the world you know, the climate change especially starts to bring really very bad weather events when people die, when there are floods you know, and things like that and with the you know, the melting of the ice on the northern poles and Antarctica, apparently the sea level rise is going to be quite high and they might affect Britain at some point, what do you think about that?
Participant: This might make me sound horrible but I think if, honestly I think that’s just a kind of natural thing, like a flood, I don’t really know if that’s caused by the way we treat the environment, I think to me that’s just, what I think it’s a natural thing, like an earthquake or a tsunami or something like that, I think it’s more a natural thing rather than we’ve caused it, but I think if it went [?? 41:18 break in recording] affect like places near us or Britain then I think obviously people would be a bit more environmentally friendly and might think about what they’re doing and how it could be harming the planet, I think if it was to  affect kind of nearer home then it would be a bigger issue for me.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: I don’t think I know enough but I think if [?? 41:47 break in recording] and maybe if somebody was to teach me or maybe I was to learn more about the environment and I think that’s kind of good for everyone, but I’ve not really had the opportunity or thought about it really to go and learn more, but I think if I was to kind of educate myself more then there might be certain issues or things that I’d feel more strongly about or try to change in my behaviour, and especially my family’s like eco-friendly behaviour but I don’t think, right now, I don’t really have a big problem in not knowing a lot, but I think maybe if I did learn then it would be something that I’d probably feel strongly about and want to change.
Interviewer: Do you think that people receive enough support to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: Well I think the internet’s great that you could ask anything and you’d find out anything, I think it’s more people and their attitudes towards it, I think [?? 42:47 break in recording] stuff out there if people would just look for it they’d find it, so certain information on the environment I don’t really bother so that’s why I don’t know a lot but if I was to bother then I know I would find a lot, out a lot about the planet and environmental stuff, so I think it’s more the people, I think there is enough information just if you want to find it or look for it or not.
Interviewer: Do you think that you know, the government could provide to people some kind of support in that respect, or?
Participant: I don’t know, if they maybe introduced something that maybe a talk in school or make it compulsory for eco-friendly in schools and I think that would be good, to educate the kind of younger generation, I know I’m still included in that but maybe like primary school, but I just think there’s enough out here on the internet that if you want [?? 43:48 break in recording] at it you can, there’s only so much somebody can do, there’s only so much you can do, it’s just up to the people really.
Interviewer: Great, thank you very much, and maybe just the last question I wanted to ask you about is are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, I don’t, I recycle, yeah, I don’t really, I don’t really know a lot but I think [?? 44:18 break in recording] is one of the main things and I do that, but probably if I was to learn about it as I said then I’d probably find something else that I’d find out that I could do and I’d probably do that if I agreed with it or not, but I think yeah, I’m quite happy with what I do.
Interviewer: And if you wanted to improve anything in that respect what would you like to, what kind of things you would have liked to learn more about or do more in environmental terms?
Participant: Maybe instead of recycling the other things that I could do now that I could help, maybe, I don’t know, like things to buy that’s maybe more eco-friendly or better for the planet or, I don’t know, because I think you can get the fuel efficient cars now that you can charge up or something like that that’s better for the planet, maybe if there was like one of them that was cheap to run then I’d probably buy one of them, but I don’t know, just, I don’t think I know a lot that I could kind of comment and say, “oh well, I do this, I do that”, but if there was something I found out about then I probably would do that.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, and about your neighbourhood, what are the things that you particularly like and what are things that you find a little bit problematic?
Participant: About what, sorry?
Interviewer: About your neighbourhood, about your area, what kind of things do you like in your neighbourhood, in your area, and what things do you find a bit problematic?
Participant: We have a lot of recycling bins and bins for like dog waste which I like instead of just putting it in a normal bin because if you’ve ever tried to open a bin and you’ve put dog waste in it the smell could knock you out, so I like that there’s kind of specific bins for that, and I stay kind of down a cul-de-sac so it’s [?? 46:17 break in recording] fresh air which I definitely like, but compared to living in the city, I couldn’t, the smells from the buses, like the fumes and stuff I think I couldn’t cope with because my mum’s got asthma so hers is quite bad so she needs to be careful kind of too much smoke and stuff like that really upsets her asthma, so I like we’re kind of out the wayish, it’s more, we’ve got a [?? 46:47 break in recording] behind us so it’s more kind of a fielded area and fresh air rather than kind of living in a flat in like Glasgow city centre, there’s like a lot of fumes about and stuff like that, I couldn’t, I don’t think I could live somewhere like that.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much Victoria, it was really, really useful so I am kind of done with the questions about the study so maybe just a couple of…