Interviewer: Thank you very much for taking part in the diary study.
Participant: No problem.
Interviewer: So we just have an hour to speak about your experiences of the diary study and then to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary.
Participant: Yeah, no problem.
Interviewer: So yeah, there are no good or bad answers, like with the diary, so we’re just interested in people’s honest points of view really, so do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: No, no, just fire ahead.
Interviewer: Okay, so could you please tells how you found filling in the diary overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was a fine, it got a little bit repetitive I suppose on certain days when kind of answers were the same but it was easy to fill in so yeah, it was fine.
Interviewer: Was there anything quite tedious to write down?
Participant: I suppose it was just when the kind of reasoning was the same kind of on some of the questions where you kind of said why you did a certain thing and kind of it was the same reasons as before, but I understand why it was the same.
Interviewer: Okay, and did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: No, no, it was kind of how I expected from what was explained to me to begin with.
Interviewer: Okay, could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: To be honest I think it’s generally just the two of us in my household so we tend to not always do big shops, we just sort of kind of spread it, we live quite centrally so we can pop out and get things we need, I mean we sometimes go to kind of and do a main shop but generally they tend to sort of smaller shops.
Interviewer: How often a week or month do you think that you go and buy food then?
Participant: It can vary from about maybe a couple of times to 3 or 4 depending on how organised we are.
Interviewer: Is that a week?
Participant: A week, yeah.
Interviewer: And what stores do you tend to go to?
Participant: Tend to go to between kind of Morrisons, Tesco and Lidl I suppose.
Interviewer: Do you know what sort of size those are, because you know obviously Tesco do all the different stores?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, well Tesco, if I go to Tesco it usually is the small kind of express one because there’s one kind of really nearby, if we’re doing sort of a bigger shopping we’ll go to Morrisons which is sort of a decent size one, we don’t really have any like sort of the huge like super kind of super big supermarkets near us so we probably wouldn’t go to them.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, do you take a list with you?
Participant: I’m not a big list maker, if there’s, if we’re getting a lot then I’ll sort of, I will write stuff down but generally we tend to kind of go round and just sort of pick what we fancy, unless we’ve got a specific kind of meal in our heads and we might pop out and get 1 or 2 of the ingredients but yeah, unless we know we have to have it I don’t tend to make a list.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you’re choosing what food to buy, and what is less important as well?
Participant: I like sort of fresh fruit and vegetables, I tend to try and eat quite healthily so we tend to cook, kind of cook from scratch but price because obviously we don’t earn a huge amount so kind of we try and keep costs down, but generally quality, a balance of quality and kind of price I suppose.
Interviewer: How do you normally travel to the different stores you go to?
Participant: If we’re doing a bigger one we’ll go by car but we generally walk if we’re just getting a few things, either just kind of walk or cycle.
Interviewer: Okay, and you mentioned when you go shopping you tend to go with, is it your partner?
Participant: Yeah, my partner, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so do you have like a special way of coordinating who buys what or is it just…
Participant: We kind of chat about it and sort of see, it depends on who, what we’re cooking we’ll kind of discuss what we’re cooking and kind of what we need but we tend to go together.
Interviewer: How much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: I try and not waste any of it to be honest, apart from kind of I’ll, I mean we have a kind of food recycling bin so peelings and stuff go into that but generally I try not to waste anything, so if it, I mean the odd kind of vegetable might go off if it doesn’t get used up but generally we don’t waste food.
Interviewer: So please could you tell me 5 words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Now it would be charge, wasteful, environmentally unfriendly, and kind of rubbish in the streets, I don’t know if that’s 5 already?
Interviewer: That’s great, thanks. Do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: I suppose, I used to go shopping with my mum so kind of we used, I remember packing them into the trolleys, so I don’t know about kind of 6 or 7 maybe.
Interviewer: What types of bags or containers do you normally bring with you like to pack your shopping in when you go food shopping?
Participant: We usually both take a rucksack for ease sake and I mean in Scotland now they charge for bags but we’ve always because we kind of walk or cycle and stuff we tend to take a rucksack, and I’ve got a couple of those sort of bags for life things.
Interviewer: And is that an automatic sort of response, to bring a rucksack?
Participant: Yeah, if we’re planning it, I mean I tend to use a rucksack as my general bag for kind of work and things like that, so I generally have it with me because it’s got my purse and stuff in it, but I mean if I’m, if I have been out and I’ve maybe popped into the shop to get something I might not, but generally if it’s a planned shop we’ll take a, I’ll take my rucksack.
Interviewer: Okay, and is that the same for small and big shops?
Participant: Yes, yeah, I mean the big shops we’ll have planned it anyway so I’ll take, we’ll both take a rucksack and maybe a couple of like bigger bags along with us.
Interviewer: Bigger bags as in bags for life?
Participant: Yeah, like bags for life, we do have a couple of them and if I’ve got a couple of old sort of things from kind of like other bags like from other shops like clothes shops or whatever, anything I’ve got kicking around, we will take bags with us.
Interviewer: Like plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, why do you think bags for life have been given this name and do you think bags for life matches the name?
Participant: Well I think the sort of, it depends on what it’s made out of, I mean some of the more kind of hardwearing ones like the ones that are made out of, I don’t know, is it sort of canvas style kind of hemp stuff would probably last a bit longer, but I mean a couple of other ones, the bags for life, don’t look like they would last so that I wouldn’t say they looked particularly kind of, yeah, robust enough to last for a long time, so I would have said that’s false advertising but some of the other ones look a bit more kind of like they’d last a bit longer.
Interviewer: Yeah, I know what you mean. So what, oh okay, so the types of bags that you reuse, so just like any ones lying around you said…
Participant: I tend to kind of reuse them to carry maybe my gym stuff, my gym stuff or my trainers and things so, and once you get on high street shopping if I’ve bought clothes or anything when I’ve been out on the high street, so yeah, I tend to try and reuse them.
Interviewer: And where do you store your bags?
Participant: Generally in a little cupboard that all our kind of just general stuff goes, like shoes and maybe the hoover and things like that, so we’ve got a kind of little utility kind of cupboard, I tend to keep them in there.
Interviewer: And your rucksack that’s generally on you is it?
Participant: Yeah, as I said I don’t really, I’m not really a handbag type person so I generally use that because I kind of, I take a lot of stuff with me.
Interviewer: In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: For me it’s not overly important but I mean it certainly, now that it’s being charged in Scotland I mean they do, they will tend to ask whether I need one rather than just offering them up, so I mean I think the way they, and I’m not ever sure about the way they market the kind of bags for life because I think you can probably use any kind of bag for that, but yeah, generally I don’t really feel that I tend to get as I said offered them if or asked if I want one or not, so I’m not, they don’t feel like I’m being forced to buy them.
Interviewer: So do you think they, it’s not very important that they’re there, or that it is?
Participant: Well not for me, I think more people should be encouraged to use more practical bags, like proper shopping bags and go back to sort of more, which is anything sort of more sustainable, so I think if people are encouraged to use just normal kind of canvas bags rather than sort of, which are essentially plastic bags, I think that’d probably be better.
Interviewer: Okay, so if plastic bags completely disappeared from all shops, how do you think you’d find it?
Participant: It wouldn’t bother me, I think it would be a good thing because you can get all sort of bags that you can carry your shopping in, I don’t feel the need for them so, and if we can do anything to reduce our use of them I see it as a good thing.
Interviewer: So you mentioned before reusing kind of plastic bags you’ve got from different shops and things, do you ever use those bags as bin liners?
Participant: Yes, yeah we do, yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of other things do you use them for?
Participant: I use it for mainly carrying my gym stuff around, carrying dirty…
Interviewer: Oh yeah, you mentioned that, yeah.
Participant: …sort of trainers and stuff, that might be just unique to me, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Is there any particular reason you like to use the plastic bags as bin liners?
Participant: Not particularly, I suppose it is, we’re kind of using the ones we’ve collected up over time because I don’t use them nearly so much anymore, but it saves us, I suppose once we run out we will probably use bin liners and buy bin liners.
Interviewer: Roughly how many plastic bags do you think you currently have at home?
Participant: Oh, about maybe 15 to 20, maybe.
Interviewer: And do you know what types of bags those are?
Participant: There will be some sort of normal, the sort of thin shop, like the ones from supermarkets, but also as I said ones from kind of high street shopping and stuff, I tend to, I do tend to kind of keep them and collect them along the way over time, I don’t tend to throw them away.
Interviewer: So you know what the plastic bag charge is trying…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Can you remember what context you heard about it for the first time?
Participant: I remember, well I remember it being in the news obviously and then sort of all the signs going up, they’d put little signs in the supermarkets saying that from whatever date it was that they’d start charging them, so, yeah, whenever that was.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the charge?
Participant: I think it’s generally a good thing, anything that, I mean I think it’s hard to discourage people from doing something like that without kind of putting a monetary thing on it, I don’t think you can say, “stop doing it, it’s bad for the environment”, and people will, but I think once, getting through people’s kind of pockets is probably an effective way and I’d like to think, I know, I don’t know how much money they put towards charity, I don’t know whether they still do that or, I do remember there being word that they would be donating some of the proceeds to charity but I don’t know how easy that would be to police, so, but generally I think if it’s, I mean the statistics seem to be showing that it is working, so as I said if it stops people from using it I can’t see it as a, sort of a bad thing.
Interviewer: Did you find the introduction of the charge surprising at all?
Participant: No, considering sort of the targets that governments are trying to kind of make us meet to sort of reduce the reliance on things like that then yeah, it really didn’t surprise me, it’s kind of the way things are going I suppose.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you can say that’s good or not so good about the charge?
Participant: No, I suppose 5p here and there’s not really kind of a bad thing I suppose if you’ve forgot to bring your other bags with you and you had to buy a bunch of them then it may not be so good for you and people, but I think no matter kind of what kind of income you’re on or anything I don’t think it’s a difficult thing to remember to bring or kind of maybe invest in a decent sized bag, so I think overall it’s good for everybody, so yeah.
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced into England in October?
Participant: Yes, I did know that.
Interviewer: And do you know when and how you heard about that?
Participant: I kind of suspected that they would follow suit, I think it was maybe in the news, but the reason I knew is that date is we were actually down in England on holiday so we were in a shop, Booths and saw the little signs saying that it was getting introduced on the 5th of October.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well again that goes back to sort of, I know there are targets so I would like to think it’s generally a kind of a look to being more sustainable, but as I said I don’t know how much of those profits go to kind of a good cause or if they just go back into the profits of the supermarkets themselves, so yeah, I’m not, it would be good to sort of see if there’s any transparency around sort of if they are making charitable donations, it’d be good to see the sort of evidence of that.
Interviewer: So you’re not sure if the charge is kind of fulfilling its aims basically?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. Did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affect you?
Participant: Me personally not really, it hasn’t really changed what I was doing already, I always try to minimise my plastic bag usage, I suppose it’s made me more careful about definitely bringing, bringing my own bags and trying to sort of plan it a little bit better, but I was generally trying to sort of be prepared anyway, so.
Interviewer: So it hasn’t changed your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person after the introduction of the charge?
Participant: I think I was trying to be that kind of person anyway so I don’t think it’s unduly affected, it’s made me more so, it’s just the behaviours I was already kind of doing so I wouldn’t have said it had any kind of effect as I was already pretty environmentally aware anyway.
Interviewer: Have you noticed any changes in your local area or in your country after the introduction of the charge?
Participant: I mean I’d like to say yes but you still, I think, I think it might take a little bit of time to sort of see a positive, you still see kind of in the streets and things kind of litter going about but I can’t say I’ve overly noticed it but I suppose if the statistics, if they were saying that it has gone down then there will be some, some difference there but kind of in the cities you do still see a lot of the debris on the streets, but yeah, I hadn’t really thought about it to be quite honest, but I’d like to think to think it does, has made a difference maybe to landfill and sort of overall, the overall kind of environmental effect of it.
Interviewer: What do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is being delivered in your country?
Participant: I think it’s, as I said I’d like to see a bit more kind of openness about where the profits are going and kind of, and maybe a kind of sort of more information about how it is and sort of what the effects have been I guess, I mean I don’t know how long it’s been in force, so.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: I think everyone can always do more, I think again it’s behavioural change does take time so I think if someone’s not environmentally friendly, of that kind of mind anyway, it’s not going to, and if it doesn’t really kind of, “oh, it’s 5p”, that’s not going to overly kind of change their mind, I think it has to be part of a bigger sort of practice, everything, rather than just the one, but I think everyone can be doing a bit more, maybe rather than just encouraging buying bags for life or whatever, actually encourage people to buy, sort of bring their own bags and things like that, so I definitely think we can always do more.
Interviewer: So you think that it is being encouraged enough but that in itself is not enough?
Participant: No, no, I still think they can do more to encourage it, definitely.
Interviewer: So they can do more to encourage it as well?
Participant: Oh yes, I think you can always do more, yeah.
Interviewer: When the 5p charge comes into effect in England there’ll be some types of bags and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, so for example in smaller shops they won’t have to charge but in bigger shops they will, do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: Probably not because I mean I don’t know, as I said it’s all tied into where the profits of that 5p are, like the charge is going, I mean I would imagine that if it’s going back into the businesses then small businesses will probably gain from that if there’s a kind of cost attached to producing the bags they use, but yes, big businesses are charging them then it should probably be blanket but again it depends on the sort of legislation around it and what it means for smaller businesses and things.
Interviewer: And how do you think that the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as the congestion charge?
Participant: Well I don’t know, I don’t know much about the congestion charge, but I think it’s probably a lot less because I mean as I said sort of 5p for a bag’s not really very much, unless you’re using a huge amount of them, but as I said I think it’s using kind of money, hitting people financially is probably a more effective way than just encouraging them to do it so I don’t know, I would imagine the congestion charge is more but as I said I don’t know too much.
Interviewer: Okay, are you saying that the plastic bag charge would be comparable to you know, if they were going to start charging on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables?
Participant: Again it needs to be, it depends on how they do it, I think less packaging’s always a good thing.
Interviewer: Does it depend on where the profits are going do you mean?
Participant: Yeah, definitely, but as I said I wouldn’t be expecting sort of, let’s say you were getting loose vegetables I wouldn’t, I would be not, unless they kind of offered an alternative to it I wouldn’t be so happy to have to kind of be charged for all the sort of small plastic bags for vegetables and things like that.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Hopefully we’ll continue to see people using them less, I don’t know if they’ll maybe as sort of rates of inflation change if the charges will start going up, and again I don’t know what kind of targets people have, but again I would probably like to sort of see more kind of behavioural change encouragement as I said, sort of using rather than just charging for bags kind of encouraging behaviour that supports things like taking your own bags and things like that, so hopefully we’ll continue to see positive things but I think again it needs to be tied in with sort of a wider kind of approach to sustainability.
Interviewer: Do you tend to save your water at home?
Participant: Save my water in the home in what kind of way, sorry?
Interviewer: Like turning off taps and trying to…
Participant: Oh no, yes, well I work in the water industry so I’m quite, yeah, I’m quite water aware, so yeah, I turn off taps if I’m not using it and I certainly use only as much water in sort of the kettle that I need and things like that yeah, and I take short showers and all that kind of thing.
Interviewer: Okay, and are you on a water meter or anything like that?
Participant: No, no weren’t not, no.
Interviewer: Okay, is there a reason why you try to save water at home?
Participant: I just, again it’s just I see it as an environmentally kind of way of living, yeah, I know how much, as I said I work in the water industry so I know it’s, even though we live in Scotland and it’s kind of, you don’t get charged for your usage I still think it’s a resource that a lot of money goes into so I think it’s just our kind of moral duty to kind of save it and not kind of waste it.
Interviewer: Okay, is it kind of a habit now?
Participant: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: What about energy?
Participant: Yes, energy as I said, certainly with fuel being, prices being quite high, I used to be on a pay-as-you-go meter and that’s definitely made my behaviours very, quite obsessive about turning off lights and not putting on heating unless it’s absolutely needed and things like that, so.
Interviewer: Yeah, I’ve been on one of those meters before as well. Is that kind of a habit then as well, you turning off the lights and things?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Yeah, like bottles and things like that?
Interviewer: Yeah, anything.
Participant: Yeah, I try and reuse as much as possible to be honest.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples, you said what was it bottles did you say?
Participant: Yes, bottles, well we’ll kind of use empty kind of jars, my partner likes making jam and I’ll use it for sort of, if I make my own dressing I’ll reuse jars for that.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well or do you plan to do that?
Participant: It is kind of a habit because I mean I’ll rinse them out anyway if I’m recycling but if I know, if we’re keeping kind of herbs and spices and things, we’ll keep them in jars and kind of any liquid left over type things, so they’re quite useful for that.
Interviewer: Do you ever look at packaging in the supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah, I guess, I mean I don’t, I try and, we try and cook things from scratch so we don’t tend to buy ready meals or anything so but yeah, I mean that’s definitely I think you do notice when it says on it “we’re trying to reduce our packaging”, and I think it’s been a slow process, I still think the shops can probably do more to kind of reduce them.
Interviewer: So when you’re looking at packaging it’s more the amount that’s there that you’re looking at rather than I don’t know, the style or…
Participant: Oh no, I’m not concerned, tend to sort of be discerning over kind of, oh well it won’t make me kind of want to buy it if it’s got pretty packaging.
Interviewer: Do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yes, yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you recycle?
Participant: As much as I can, as I said I do food, paper, cardboard, glass, yeah, everything, it’s fairly easy in our, we’ve got, we kind of keep boxes that we separate everything out into, we’ve got communal bins outside so it’s fairly quick and simple to do.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well or planned?
Participant: No, well it’s become a habit, I always just, I just recycle as much as possible.
Interviewer: Okay. How often do you drive?
Participant: Sadly I have to drive for my work so I probably drive most days, I’ve been trying to, during the summer I do try and cycle to work if I can but unfortunately I broke my elbow this summer so I’ve not been able to, but I do drive to work but for anything short distances I tend, we live in the middle of town so I tend to walk everywhere when I can.
Interviewer: Do you ever save your car trips or not?
Participant: If I know I don’t have to do them yeah, sort of if it’s not raining I will walk to friend’s houses, walk into town definitely, I’ll try and sort of, because I’m aware I drive quite a lot for work certainly in my personal life I try and absolutely minimise it.
Interviewer: And do you think you drive in fuel efficient way?
Participant: I try to as much as possible, I would love to be able to get one of those hybrid cars but unfortunately I’ve got a kind of little second hand thing so I’m aware of kind of driving at a certain speed I try and keep it at, and sort of changing gears and things like that.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, you mentioned cycling and walking short distances and things, do you know how often you do that?
Participant: When I can, probably several times a week as I said if I’m going to the shops or whatever I’ll definitely walk unless it’s absolutely chucking it down, so yeah, I’d say most days a week I will do some walking of some sort.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Yes, I do, I don’t clean that often so that helps, but I’ve tried kind of doing, we try to sort of makeup, like homemade stuff with lemon juice and bicarbonate of soda and stuff like that…
Interviewer: Oh, that’s cool!
Participant: We do try, but…
Interviewer: Is there a reason why you like to do the homemade cleaning…
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Like what makes you want to make the homemade cleaning products?
Participant: Just because I’d seen something and I’d sort of thought I’d just try it out and it’s certainly cheaper than a lot of things, but I have used the eco-friendly branded eco-friendly stuff in the past.
Interviewer: Okay, and what made you decide to use the eco-friendly products?
Participant: Just because I just hate the idea of all this kind of very high chemical stuff going into our water system, yeah, and my knowledge of that’s quite kind of extensive so, and it’s something I just kind of, it can’t, I’m thinking it can’t be good, all that kind of, especially bleach and things like that, I don’t like the thought of that going back into our environment.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy organic food?
Participant: I’d say we’re not very good at that but mainly because I feel it’s over, often overpriced and it’s just something I couldn’t afford to keep doing, but yeah, it depends where we are, if it’s a not too expensive I will try and buy it but I do think it’s overpriced.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy sustainable foods, so foods that help sustain animal welfare and forests and fisheries and things like that?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely, we certainly try and buy sort of sustainable fish from kind of sustainable sources, I will check packaging for that, so yeah, I mean, and also I think it does affect the quality so yeah, where we can will, we will try and do that.
Interviewer: And do you support any environmental organisations or issues?
Participant: Yes, yeah, I support, well I don’t know if Water Aid can be thought of as that, but I donate regularly to the RSPB so I suppose they’re environmental, it’s looking after wildlife I guess.
Interviewer: Okay, and is that kind of financial support that you…
Participant: Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so all of these behaviours we’ve just sort of talked about, water, energy, packaging, recycling, the cleaning products, all of that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: Sort of being asked about it I just sort of see how automatic it is for me and how long I’ve kind of been doing it anyway, so it didn’t feel like anything I sort of wouldn’t normally do anyway.
Interviewer: But it brought to your attention that actually you do do a lot of the things that they’re asking quite automatically?
Participant: Yes, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: So what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: I guess it means doing everything in your power to sort of not have a negative impact on the world, or try and minimise it, and it is very difficult, a difficult thing, but I do believe in doing every, like all the small things actually do add up and I think sort of in this world yeah, I do have to drive and stuff, you can’t really beat yourself up too much, but I do think, I do think everyone should be kind of recycling, things like that should be like it is for me, I think it should be an automatic thing, and it should also be made easier to do for people who don’t maybe, I suppose, but yeah, it’s just trying to have, sort of minimise our impact our impact on our world I suppose.
Interviewer: How concerned are you, if at all, are you about the, sorry, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Very concerned, it’s something that I’m pretty passionate about and I do think that it’s, yeah, it’s something that I do think about every day in sort of what we do and kind of it’s hard not to when you see, watch the news and things like that, so it’s something I’m very passionate about.
Interviewer: Are there any sort of specific environmental issues that come to mind or?
Participant: Well general climate change and what, the thing that sort of annoys me most is how corporations are really not being made accountable for what they do and the kind of impact they’re having, but certainly climate change is my biggest sort of worry I guess.
Interviewer: Okay, and then obviously the water you mentioned before?
Participant: Yes, but I see it all as part of, I don’t think you can be environmentally friendly and not kind of think of it as in climate change because I think we’ve got to a point where we’re sort of minimising things, I think we’ve got to a point where we’ve done too much damage so everything else is kind of just minimising the effects I guess.
Interviewer: What does the environment mean to you?
Participant: Just, environment is the world we live in and for other people as well, because I think that’s something that is missed is that everything, even though we might not see it in our country I know that it’s kind of, when you look at the problems they’ve got with flooding in India and stuff like that it’s just, to me it’s our entire world, so that’s, I suppose that’s what environment means to me, is like the whole lot.
Interviewer: And would you say the environment is an important part of your identity and your life?
Participant: Yes, because I love being, going out in nature and I think if we don’t look after it it’ll slowly disappear, so I’m very much an outdoorsy person so I think, and all the sort of climate change, what it’s doing to it is definitely, I see the effects every day, so definitely, it’s definitely part of my identity.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste you create?
Participant: Seeing that I do try and kind of minimise it it doesn’t concern me because I know that I’m probably a lot better than some other people at minimising my waste, but yeah, it always concerns me, I think we can always do better and do more about minimising how much waste we create.
Interviewer: And what about recyclable waste as well as non-recyclable waste?
Participant: Yeah, I wish it was, there’s certain things, as I said I try and kind of recycle as much as possible but I think you always look at the packaging and you’re not sure whether it is, I think we should be getting to a point where we should be able to recycle all our packaging and stuff, so I think, yeah, I think we need to, I think kind of the people who produce things need to do more to kind of make it easier for people.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so you know, social, economic and health issues, how important, if at all, are environmental issues to you?
Participant: I think they all go hand-in-hand because I think if we look after our world, I think it’s sustainability and I think sustainability goes within to economics and social things because I think if we try and kind of pull together as communities in a kind of sustainable way then that has a knock on effect for social kind of, the social good and economics, so I think you can’t really sort of isolate them, so yeah, I think you can’t, they all kind of work together to sort of, if you can get one right then you’ll tend to, the others will get better as well.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: As I said I do try and kind of read up and see kind of, I guess my friends are quite environmentally aware as well so yeah, I suppose I do feel kind of up to date on things, but I suppose you can always, it’s sort of changing and theories are always changing and stuff, but overall I’d say I would be, I would say I’m pretty well informed.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yes, yeah, because as I said I think you can read it, all it takes is to read up on it but I think they do need to be supported by kind of governments and things in sort of how they, again like I was saying how they produce packaging, I think everyone, they need to sort of enable societies and stuff, but I certainly feel like I have the skills to kind of, to reduce my kind of impact.
Interviewer: And do you feel like you receive enough support from for example the government to be environmentally friendly?
Participant: I think they could do, I think they can do more as I said, sort of by kind of making it easier for people to recycle, providing, I think not enough done in city centres to provide kind of recycle bins as well as normal bins, I definitely think there’s always, people can do more, and sort of also kind of I think they should go back to I think the support for renewable energy and things like that has kind of, is slipping, slipping a bit, and I think again they need to get back on track for doing that, I don’t know whether that’s just because of who the current government is and things like that, so I think that definitely they can do more.
Interviewer: And what about support from environmental organisations?
Participant: Environmentals are amazing stuff, are kind of, if they’re charities then I think they’re probably doing what they can within their abilities, so I think they’re probably dong what they can, it’s really the governments and kind of people in power that really need the be doing more.
Interviewer: Do you think there’s enough communication on environmental issues?
Participant: Again I think…
Interviewer: So you mentioned recycling, what was it you said before, oh about the packing, you don’t know whether you can recycle it or not.
Participant: Yes, yeah, I mean I think there’s always more, more information that people can be doing and again I just, I think climate change is such an important subject, I think it’s never, I don’t think we can ever sort of give too much information about it, unfortunately I think things do get kind of, fall by the wayside when other issues come to the fore in the news and things like that, but I certainly don’t think that the government are doing enough to bring it to the fore.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the legislation and regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: Again I think it could be doing more to sort of make it easier, I know sort of certainly around again, around renewable energies I think they’ve sort of gone back a little bit on that, but yeah, I don’t know too much about current legislation at the moment, but I certainly think there’s more we can be doing.
Interviewer: Okay, and are you happy with what you currently do for the environment or not?
Participant: I would always like to do more, I would love to be able to use my car less or be able to get a hybrid or something, or get back to sort of not having to use it at all, but unfortunately I do need it for my work, and again if I had a house that I could put solar panels on I would love to do that but I have a flat so, I think I do what I can within my means, but I’d always love to be able to do more.
Interviewer: And are there any environmental behaviours that you’re particularly happy with?
Participant: Like I say I’ve always, I never waste food and I recycle everything that I can, so I think I’m quite happy with what I do in regards to that.
Interviewer: Okay, what are the main problems, if any, in your neighbourhood?
Participant: People, funnily enough, using the recycling bins as normal bins, that’s, I absolutely hate that…
Interviewer: What, so are they putting non-recyclable rubbish…
Participant: Yeah, just using it as a general bin, which it just, oh, I can’t stand.
Interviewer: So then do they have one bin of general refuse and a recycling bin of general refuse?
Participant: They have their little kind of normal bins but as I said all the sort of flats, I live in a sort of Council and there’s lots of, Council estate, it’s ex-Council estate and there’s lot of kind of flats, so they all have chutes but I don’t know, some people may just carry them out or just leave them out and then we tend to get seagulls that peck through them and then you just get rubbish all over the streets which is very frustrating, and people letting their dog crap all over the pavement tends to be a problem in our area.
Interviewer: Right, okay, so litter as well and dog poo?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Right, okay, is there anything that we’ve sort of discussed that you want to add to or emphasise?
Participant: No, I think we’ve covered sort of…
Interviewer: Quite a lot?
Participant: Yeah.