Interviewer: So yeah, the first question I wanted to ask you is how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Filling it in, it was easy, it was easy to get a hold of it after a couple of days after we knew what, that the questions were going to be the same, I think that would have meant we could think about it during the day and just remember a bit better. That, I personally thought it was going to be different questions each day but after I realised it was the same I could just think about it during the day and then just take note mentally and then just fill it in, so it was quite easy to fill in to be honest.
Interviewer: Was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: No, was fine, just remembering it as I went on to be honest. I know I didn’t really send in much to do with shopping but that’s just because the way my family just gets a big shop in at the start of the month and then just generally tops it up when we need extra bits. So I did send in a picture, I didn’t have a receipt unfortunately but I sent in a picture of some shopping that I did but that was about it to be honest.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: There was a lot to do with recycling and sort of environmental aspects which I thought it would be more like household behaviours, what we do when we come home but it was a bit of, just found it was a lot different to what I was expecting the questions to be.
Interviewer: And, right, is there anything else that you would like to add to, you know, the diaries before we move on to the next thing?
Participant: No, that’s fine. Happy to move on, yeah.
Interviewer: So maybe the next thing we could speak about is the shopping precisely, you know, so you’ve just, you know, touched upon that question of how many times a week you go to the food shopping, so what does your typical food shopping trip look like?
Participant: Well I don’t, usually don’t do it myself, it’s my mum or my dad usually do it but they both get paid around a similar time of the month so they’re, once they do get paid they’ll go and do a big shop sort of at the end of the month and then if we need anything as we go along they’ll then just top up what we’ve got, fresh fruit and veg, if we’re doing anything with that.
Interviewer: So what could be your personal food shopping trip, whatever it is, even if it’s a top up, how does it look like?
Participant: If I do a shop? It’s usually just things like bread and milk, some fresh carrots, broccoli, if we’re having a large family meal. I went shopping for them last week and got some, got in some fresh meat from a local butchers, just because they were planning to do a family meal. Then if I go with them to do the big food shop it will just have just general things that we eat throughout the house like tinned soups, spaghetti, we eat a lot of pasta so if we run out of pasta during the month I’ll get some of that… That’s it really. We tend to mix up what we buy usually so it is just really it’s all, it’s foods.
Interviewer: And how many times a week would you do this kind of shopping you just described, occasional sort of top up with…?
Participant: Usually it’s just once every two weeks or maybe once every week if we are all in the house. Like this week my sister had gone back to school and me, my mum and my dad had a busy week in work, it’s a busy time [?? 04:00] in the house sort of week and a half. My older sister still lives with us, she was there a lot but she usually eats with her boyfriend, like has a takeaway.
Interviewer: Okay. And what stores do you use to buy food usually and why?
Participant: What was that sorry?
Interviewer: What kind of stores or supermarkets do you use to buy food usually or, you know, outlets whatever, you just mentioned the butchers, so it can be a supermarket obviously?
Participant: Yeah. So my mum and dad use Asda or Tesco, I prefer to go to maybe, we’ve got, where we live we’ve got like a market so I prefer to go there to get the fruit, the veg and the meat.
Interviewer: What kind of market is it? Is it sort of farmer’s market or is it sort of…?
Participant: In a way it’s like a local [?? 04:55] so there is a lot of farmer’s there, there is a lot of vegetables and meats and cheeses that are sold there but there’s also things like clothes as well, just a general sort of local market.
Interviewer: But it’s not like organic sort of market…
Participant: No.
Interviewer: …sort of thing? Yeah. Because there are different types, yes, I just wanted to find out, yeah. And what kind of shops do you use when you go for topping up, you know, milk or this or that?
Participant: If it’s just small like my bread and milk or something that I can get from a local corner shop we’ll just use one of those because there are quite a few where I live so it’s easy to do on my way home from work when I get off the bus or getting out of the car, I can just stop off and pick it up a lot easier than going in a big supermarket.
Interviewer: And how do you plan when you’re going to stop and go to the corner shop or whatever, is there someone who reminds you or do you know yourself you would need it?
Participant: Yeah. Like usually, quite often I’ll work quite late because I work in the town centre, it’s an hour bus ride, used to or can be up to two hours if it’s quite busy, so if I’m getting home quite late they may ask me on my way home if I can pick some stuff up because I’m usually the last person home. So nine times out of ten someone else will ask me to get it.
Interviewer: And is supermarket, so I don’t have now the data for everyone but I don’t remember, so now in particular which location are you in?
Participant: I’m in Manchester.
Interviewer: In Manchester, yeah. Okay, so you work close to the city basically or you are in the city?
Participant: I work in the city but I live sort of, I’m classed as Manchester but it’s like right south Manchester so we are quite out of the way.
Interviewer: Right. And when you go to basically to corner shops or where you, you know, where you stop somewhere on the way, is that local or is it…?
Participant: Yeah. So there’s a corner shop just two minutes’ walk from our house.
Interviewer: And do you usually walk to, you know, to do these top up shopping yourself?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And did you mention also using public transport or, you know, getting the bus or something?
Participant: Yeah. So if I’m getting quite a bit I can walk to my local supermarket, it’s about a ten minute walk but then if I’ve got a lot of stuff I might get a taxi or get a bus back because the bus network is quite good where I live and it stops just by my house so it’s a lot easier than carrying a load of bags home. If I can manage it though I do prefer to walk back if I’m doing a shop.
Interviewer: And your family when they do shopping do they use car or do they use transport, public transport?
Participant: Yeah, so they’ll use the car if they do a big shop, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. Right. And when you choose food what is important for you and what is less important?
Participant: The price is [?? 07:49] we like eating…
Interviewer: I’m sorry because the line was cutting quite badly just now so there was a whole, whole phrase has gone, could you say that again please?
Participant: [?? 08:08] that’s important when I do the shop, I don’t like paying too much for food when I know I can get it for a lot less for the same [?? 08:16] have fresh food as opposed to, you know, like frozen food. I prefer to get fresh vegetables and cook them rather than get frozen vegetables in a packet, things like that, that is important.
Interviewer: And is it important for you whether the food is locally grown or not necessarily?
Participant: That’s not something that I am too worried about to be honest.
Interviewer: So just as long as it looks fresh it’s good?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And regarding the food waste, do you know if there is any food waste in your house, you know?
Participant: Yeah. So there is a bit of food waste. [?? 09:01] peelings, waste from when we’re cooking and then if, because my sister [?? 09:08] so she, if she’s not happy with something that we’ve cooked then she just won’t eat it so there is occasionally effectively a full meal that is wasted.
Interviewer: And is it, what I meant by food waste is more like things that you haven’t used that you have to throw away?
Participant: Not usually but if there is then it is like maybe a few potatoes at the bottom of a bag that’s just not been used, have been forgotten about or maybe an onion if it’s gone bad, yeah. But it is not often.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you. Right, so is there anything else that you would like probably to add to the food shopping at all?
Participant: No, nothing else really.
Interviewer: Then in this case we’ll move to the next topic which is, I’m going to ask you a slightly unusual thing, what kind of words or expression would come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: Waste. Unnecessary. I guess obviously you’re talking about just the general plastic bags that are free and not the bags for life, is that correct?
Interviewer: Any of those you can?
Participant: Any of them?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Useless. I find when I use them, when I’ve forgot to take bags out with me they do break a lot, they’re not very strong. That’s about all I can, that springs to mind.
Interviewer: And do you remember that point in your life when you came across, you know, that plastic bag for the first time?
Participant: Was probably very young.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: I was probably very young to be honest. I don’t quite remember, it’s just always been there.
Interviewer: So you always saw them in the shops, you always saw people with them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember any times when there were no plastic bags yet in the supermarkets or…?
Participant: No, not really because I’m only 20 so I’m still quite young. As I say like they’ve just always been there, every time you go into a shop there are some plastic bags.
Interviewer: And what do you generally think about these type of bags?
Participant: I think there’s, well usually we [?? 11:29] so we have like fabric bags or bags for life that we use that I take with me to do my shopping. So I think they are a bit unnecessary these days, it’s just easy to get a lot stronger bag that lasts a lot longer.
Interviewer: So what kind of bags do you use at home, you mentioned bags for life so is that, not at home I mean but to bring your shopping, is that, what kind of plastic, what kind of bags for life are these?
Participant: Just ones that we’ve bought from a supermarket.
Interviewer: And what type are they? Are they plastic, are they kind of more heavy duty?
Participant: Some of them are plastic, some of them are like a fabric, so we’ve got a mixture of the two.
Interviewer: And do you always use those or does it happen you’re to take some of the, you know, free from the till?
Participant: If I plan to go then I will [?? 12:27] then I will. Or if I can manage it I’ll just carry it without a bag at all.
Interviewer: And do you, how many, well I would say how many times a month does it happen to you to take the free bags from the store?
Participant: Maybe twice, three times a month.
Interviewer: And how many do you usually take?
Participant: Just one or two at the most.
Interviewer: And what is it make you, you know, to go more for using your own bags than to take those that are provided?
Participant: It just saves on getting a build-up of plastic bags because a few years ago when we had loads of just plastic bags lying around in the house, like we had a whole cupboard just to housing them, so it just cuts down on having them around the house all the time. So it’s gives a cleaner house and also the bags that you get from the supermarket I find are a bit frail and they do break so because I don’t usually drive to get a shop, I tend to get public transport or walk back, it’s just a lot easier to know that you’ve got a stronger bag that isn’t going to break.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And the bags for life that you have at home you’ve mentioned that you had two types, the plastic ones and like canvas bags, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How do you find the difference between those?
Participant: I prefer to use the canvas ones but we don’t have many to be honest, so we just use the plastic ones that we’ve built up over the years that we’ve just kept hold of.
Interviewer: And those plastic ones, how long do they last do you know approximately?
Participant: Well we’ve had some for like a year I’d say, have last for about a year. Some of the ones don’t last that long so might get pulled or ripped but…
Interviewer: Do you know if anyone in your family replaces them?
Participant: We may replace if we run low or if they go, if my mum and dad go out and they forgot to take the bags then they just buy the bags for life at the till instead of the free plastic bags.
Interviewer: And so [overtalking], yeah, go on please? [No response] Yeah. And how many do you have currently at home do you know?
Participant: I’d say about maybe ten, eleven, twelve.
Interviewer: And do you know if they are all taken to the shop when they go food shopping or…?
Participant: I never take them all. I might take three or four if I, when I do that I don’t do a big shop but my mum and dad do take most of them when they do go to do their shopping.
Interviewer: And where are they stored at home?
Participant: They’re stored in a drawer in the kitchen.
Interviewer: In the kitchen? Yeah, okay. Right, so another question I wanted to ask is about, hold on a second, basically yeah, when you go, you know, when, you mentioned then in some situations you forget to take the bags, so what kind of planning does it require to, you know, to take your bag with you?
Participant: Well the only time that I don’t take them out with me is when I’ve not, when I didn’t know that I was going to be going shopping, if I’m just picking something up on my way home from work or something like that is the only time that I don’t use them.
Interviewer: And is there [overtalking], yeah?
Participant: I was just going to say my mum and dad have occasionally forgot to take them with them when they do the shop, at that point then they just get new bags for life at the till instead of using the free ones. But just, I just think they’re easily accessible, they’re just in a drawer in the kitchen which is just by my front door to leave, it’s just not very easy, not very hard to remember that they need to be taken. It’s just become a part of, you know, just getting ready to go and do the shop. It’s just remembering just to take the bags.
Interviewer: And is there a reason for, you know, because some people they kind of carry a bag with them all the time somewhere at the bottom at the bag or, you know, these kind of things, is there a reason for not doing that all the time so that just, you know, whenever you need it you know you have it and…?
Participant: Yeah. I think if you take a bag with you on a daily basis I think it is easy to just have a bag with you all the time but for myself I don’t take sort of my own sort of rucksack or anything out with me when I go to work or go out to see friends or anything. So it’s, I think in that case it’s just you can either have it in a pocket or you can just not take one.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. Okay. And how do you reuse, do you reuse at all, you know, the single use plastic bags at home, those thinner ones that you get for free? Are they getting reused at your home?
Participant: Yeah. They do get, if we do take them then they do get reused. They’re not thrown straight in a bin.
Interviewer: And how do you reuse them at home?
Participant: We may use them as like a temporary bin if we’ve got no bin bags, anything like that, or we may take them out the shop to do a shop with us instead of taking a bag, or taking them with the bags for life.
Interviewer: And do you know how many of those you have at home?
Participant: At the moment maybe two or three.
Interviewer: Not much, yeah. And when did you start to use less of those because I think I do remember you mentioned that at some point you had loads at home?
Participant: Yeah. It was probably about two years, yeah, about two years ago when I’d just started my job at the moment, so it was about two years ago.
Interviewer: And why do you think, you know, your family decided not to do that again?
Participant: To be honest it was mainly myself because I just, you know, I’d just got a new job, I was about 18 and I wanted to start using the kitchen more but it was just a bit messy so I decided to have a clean-up in the kitchen and decided to get rid of all the bags that were just lying around just taking up a full cupboard. So I decided to get rid of those and then we just, from then we just started just using bags for life instead and taking them with us.
Interviewer: Okay. And in your opinion how is it, how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it is useful for some people, like my mum and dad do occasionally forget to take them with them but I think now that there are these stronger bags out there, you’ve got the canvas bags as well, I think it’s not as necessary as it once was [?? 19:07] people didn’t use bags for life as much as they are now. So I think they are becoming, it’s coming to a point where they don’t need to be on offer.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, how would you find it?
Participant: I think [?? 19:26]…
Interviewer: I’m sorry it’s cutting again, if you could just repeat?
Participant: Personally I would be fine, so I would still manage because I’d always take my bags with me. As long as there are bags for life that we can purchase if we do need any more then I would cope fine.
Interviewer: So it would be okay actually, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you think people would just start bringing, what kind of bags do you think they would start bringing?
Participant: Like we do, I think they’d just take our bags for life or canvas bags, a bit stronger, they would just remember to take those with them when they do go to the shop.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Participant: In my supermarket they’re free. For the bags for life they’re 10p.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah. And do you know, because there is like a national charge of 5p for single use bags so for the very thin ones, the breakable ones, and it exists already in, you know, in other places, so have you heard of it before?
Participant: I know some shops, some like local shops do charge 5p for the bags but [?? 20:39]…
Interviewer: And sorry, it was cut again, so you’re not sure?
Participant: Some of the shops in my local area, like not the big supermarkets but they do charge 5p for bags. The supermarkets do still give them out free but I have heard of the charge in other places, yeah.
Interviewer: So you haven’t heard in, you know, other places in the UK for example yet, no?
Participant: No. I’ve not heard that.
Interviewer: Okay. And what do you think about this kind of idea of 5p plastic bag charge for the thin single use bags?
Participant: Yeah. I think it would make people take bags more. It stops the amount of plastic bags that are being used that are just disposable thin ones. So I think it is a good idea.
Interviewer: And do you find its introduction surprising at all?
Participant: What was that sorry?
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that it exists this kind of charge?
Participant: No, I don’t find it surprising. I think there are a few sort of smaller shops in my local area that have the charge, that do charge for plastic bags. I didn’t know it was a national thing, I thought it was just that, just a few shops that do it. No, I don’t find it surprising. It’s quite a smart idea to stop the use of small plastic bags.
Interviewer: So yeah, did you know that this charge is actually coming to England in October?
Participant: I didn’t know that, no.
Interviewer: Yeah, beginning of October, I think it’s the 1st of October that is going to be introduced so just basically in a couple of weeks’ time, yeah, and it already exists in Wales so all the bags are charged regardless, you know, of place or quality of the bag and the same in Scotland and Ireland.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: You didn’t know about this?
Participant: No I didn’t, no.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of this kind of thing?
Participant: I reckon it’s just to cut down on people using that many plastic bags.
Interviewer: What kind of impact would you imagine, you know, of this introduction of this policy?
Participant: I think people will stop using as many, that will cut down on the amount of plastic waste that’s going into landfill, things like that, so it’s going to be better for the environment.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any impact on urban environment at all?
Participant: Well there won’t be as many plastic bags just littering the street as well so I’m guessing that will be, that would clean up the streets a bit more. Yeah, so I think that some people will just tend to start taking bags with them.
Interviewer: And in terms of economic impact or social impact, do you think there would be any?
Participant: I think if there is any it would be very little, if any at all.
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge will fulfil its, you know, environmental purposes?
Participant: I think it will have an impact, yeah. It might have a not a huge impact, people may still decide to just pay 5p for a bag at the till. Yeah, so I think it will fulfil what it wants to fulfil, the reason that they’re bringing it in.
Interviewer: And will the introduction of this charge affect you personally or not?
Participant: Maybe slightly, not too much.
Interviewer: And when you say slightly, what would happen?
Participant: I would probably just buy a 5p bag at the till.
Interviewer: So would you just continue the same?
Participant: Yeah. So I do usually take the bags with me but when I do just pick something up when I wasn’t expecting it and I need a bag I would just pay for a bag. But I would, I do usually take bags with me anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely. Do you think this plastic bag charge will change your shopping behaviour at all or not?
Participant: I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s likely to make you more environmentally friendly person than you are at the moment or not?
Participant: I think at the moment I’m quite environmentally friendly, like the Council as well has sort of recycling bins anyway and we do recycle a lot of plastic in my local area. So I think a few plastic bags is just very minimal if I do need to purchase them so it would just be the same as it is now. But we are very environmental focused.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any other changes, you know, after the introduction of the plastic bag charge, you know, in your local area or in your country?
Participant: I’m not sure, they may work to getting rid of them altogether. [?? 25:39] locals who do have sort of more expensive canvas bags for sale, they may just bring them in and you have to take them with you instead of, you know, just getting rid of plastic bags altogether.
Interviewer: Yeah. Sorry it was cutting again, so you said that there will be more use of canvas bags?
Participant: Yeah, so…
Interviewer: Replacement, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, as they go forward they may see that the charging for bags is having the impact that they wanted so they may just get rid of plastic bags altogether and then you have to take a canvas bag with you.
Interviewer: Yeah, great. Thank you very much. And do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: [?? 26:26] plastic bags.
Interviewer: I’m sorry, it’s cutting again quite badly!
Participant: I don’t think there’s any sort of real focus around reusing plastic bags, I know they are widely on offer, reusable plastic bags but I don’t, you know, there’s no sort of real focus or sort of encouragement to use them.
Interviewer: And how about bags for life, do you feel there is an encouragement in that respect or not?
Interviewer: So yeah, we’ll just continue. Yeah, there was the question about, you know, the bags for life use, so do you think that is encouraged enough and actually it was, you know, the whole phrase I couldn’t hear it again, so if you could say it again?
Participant: I think they are widely on offer as are more permanent canvas bags but there’s no sort of real push to use them. I think in the supermarket that I use they’re just tucked underneath the sort of conveyor belt so they’re not in your face encouraging you to use them, they’re just sort of out of the way, out of sight.
Interviewer: And do you think, why do you think it’s called bag for life?
Participant: Because it’s reusable, the ones that we’ve got rarely break. They only sort of break if we catch them on something and they rip, so you can use them for a lot longer.
Interviewer: So do you think the use of bags for life matches its name somehow or not really?
Participant: I think bags for life is a bit of an exaggeration but it does last a lot longer. Like I say we’ve got some that have been there for a couple of, for a year, year and a half, so they do last a lot longer than regular sort of disposable plastic bags.
Interviewer: And did you know that they can be replaced for free in the shops for the new ones?
Participant: No, I didn’t know.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. Right, so just a couple more things about the bags and then we’ll move to something else. You know when the 5p charge will come to effect in England there will be some types of bags and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, so these kind of things, these kind of places will be small retailers and corner shops so they won’t, they will be exempt from it, and also, you know, hot food takeaways so plastic bags for hot food and drinks, and also I think clothes shops and paper and biodegradable bags, so those will not be charged. Do you think this is sort of a fair situation or not from your point of view?
Participant: I think the main issue is with the big supermarkets so starting with them is sort of, sort of the smart idea to do that first of all. But personally I think they should just do it with everywhere that sells plastic bags.
Interviewer: Anywhere?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And for paper and biodegradable bags?
Participant: I think because they will naturally decompose a lot quicker than plastic bags, I think they should be exempt from it, I think that is fair.
Interviewer: So would you make those ones exempt from the tax, I mean if you had to decide where to vote?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: That would be fine to have them for free, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. And how does for in your opinion plastic bag charge compare to other charges such as for example congestion charge, you know, the charge that exists in London, have you heard of it?
Participant: I have heard of it, I don’t know too much about it to be honest.
Interviewer: Well basically, yeah, it’s just the London city centre which has been congested for so long that, you know, London, I suppose Mayor of London whatever decided to in the peak hours, you know, during the day and also, I think the weekends and the evenings are probably not, people don’t pay but when they access city centre, particular areas in city centre in the, during the day during the week people have to pay to cross, you know, or go into whatever. So how do you think that compares to plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well I think it’s sort of the same sort of aspect, they’re doing it for the same reason as a sort of deterrent for using your car in the city centre and a deterrent for using plastic bags.
Interviewer: And would you support the introduction of congestion charge in your city?
Participant: Yeah. In the city centre definitely, it does get very busy at some times.
Interviewer: Even if you had to drive, and I know your family drives as well, yeah?
Participant: Yeah. So my family do drive. If we do go into, because we are so far away, it’s about a half an hour drive to the city centre from where we live, if we do go into the city centre then we do tend to use public transport.
Interviewer: So if you yourself had to use a car to go into the city centre would you still support this?
Participant: Yeah. I think it would stop me using it as much if I was driving into the city centre, I wouldn’t, I would tend to cut down on using it that much, which I’m guessing is the reason for having a congestion charge in the first place. But I would still support it.
Interviewer: Great, yeah. And how about another charge which actually doesn’t exist right now in the country but it exists in other places like in Germany, they have a charge, they have a little deposit on plastic bottles so each time you buy a bottled drink in a plastic bottle you pay a small deposit, again something like 5 or 10p and when you bring it back instead of, you know, just getting rid of it in the recycling or in the normal bin, you bring it to the outlet, you get the 5, 10p deposit back. What would you think about this kind of thing?
Participant: I’m not, I think it might be a bit difficult to get used to first of all but eventually everyone would cut down on using plastic bottles, people would tend to start reusing the plastic bottles a lot more so I think it would be a smart idea. I think it would be a bit more difficult to remember to do, to get used to.
Interviewer: But if you had like that incentive of getting the money back each time you bring maybe ten bottles or something it’s £1 basically or 50p?
Participant: Yeah. I think I would tend to start using it. It might be a bit difficult first of all but…
Interviewer: Just to remember to do it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. But would you be supportive of this kind of idea in principle or not?
Participant: Yeah. I think in principle, yeah, it does sound like a good idea.
Interviewer: And just a last question about all of this, in ten years’ time, you know, as now the plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England, what do you think will happen in or is likely to happen in ten years’ time as a result of this charge?
Participant: I think eventually they will just stop using plastic bags in supermarkets, in local shops, maybe go back to when they used to use paper bags, maybe start using paper bags a lot more or maybe just you’d be expected to bring your own bags to the supermarket, like they won’t provide it at all. I think eventually that sort of thing will come into practice.
Interviewer: Okay, great. Thank you. I’ll just ask you a couple of questions about, you know, different behaviours, that we have like a list of behaviours we’re asking whether you have done this or that today. So just a couple of those, not all of them. Do you save water at home?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And what kind of ways of saving water do you personally, you know, have?
Participant: We tend to not have very long, well we tend to, well I tend to not have very long showers, like I don’t, I rarely take a bath, usually it will draw a lot more water than is needed. I, you know, like there was a question about using a kettle, I only use as much as is needed sort of thing but we live in a very soft water area so if you do overfill the kettle then it’s just safe to leave it in the kettle and boil it next time instead of emptying it out and reusing.
Interviewer: And why do you tend to save water?
Participant: I’m guessing the main thing is we’re on metered water, we don’t just pay standardised fee so cost is part of it and it’s a very small cost but, so it’s just a way of saving money currently.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Okay. And how about the energy use at home, do you tend to save energy?
Participant: I again, I personally myself do. I think my two sisters don’t. I switch lights off as I leave a room, instead of using the heating if I’m home alone then I will just put a jumper on or a coat, I’m quite happy doing that.
Interviewer: And regarding like again purchases a little bit, do you look at packaging in supermarkets when you buy things, is this important to you at all or not?
Participant: It’s not something that I do look at a great deal to be honest.
Interviewer: And when you mentioned, you know, buying things at the market etc., do you find any difference between things that you buy in the market and the packaged vegetables, you know, the vegetables but loose basically in markets or in supermarkets and those that are packaged, is there any difference for you at all?
Participant: Yeah. There’s a lot less packaging when we get it from a local market instead of a supermarket.
Interviewer: And apart from the packaging, is there anything else, I don’t know…?
Participant: You know, especially like with the meat that we purchase, that is a lot nicer, a lot better quality than we get just from a local supermarket. It is slightly more expensive but it’s not noticeably more expensive so we do tend to use them instead of going to a big supermarket to get our meat produce. We do occasionally get our vegetables from a supermarket but again if I’m doing it then I will just go to a local market because I’m already there. My mum and dad they will tend to go to a supermarket first and then if they can, if they do have the time they’ll go to a local market to get other things, I myself I go to the market first to get stuff and then go to the supermarket if there’s anything that I can’t get at the market.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the household waste, so you mentioned recycling at some point?
Participant: Yeah. So my local Council has sort of three different recycling bins and a general waste bin per household, so we’ve got one for paper and cardboard waste, another for glass and plastic, we’ve got one for general food waste and garden waste, and then just a general waste bin for things that can’t be recycled. So it is a lot, it’s very easy and convenient. The food waste is collected every week, the others every two weeks, so it is a lot, very convenient and easy to recycle.
Interviewer: So do you tend to recycle on a sort of daily basis or how does that work?
Participant: Yeah. So if there is anything that can be recycled then it is recycled, it’s never put in the general waste bin.
Interviewer: And what encourages, sort of what encourages you to do so?
Participant: There is no sort of encouragement from the local Council that provide the bins but I think with us with being a quite large household, there’s five of us living there, if we put everything into the general waste bin then it would just fill up too quickly, it’s collected every fortnight so we would run out of space in the bin for our waste. So I think that is some encouragement in itself.
Interviewer: I see, yeah. Great. Does it happen you to drive at all or do you mostly use public transport?
Participant: I mostly use public transport. I don’t drive myself but my dad and my mum do drive so if, like there were a few times last week when I was running late to get to work so I did ask them to drop me off at work, so I do occasionally use a car to get to places but mostly I walk if it’s in walking distance. If I can walk there within like an hour then I will walk instead of using any other transport.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to support, you know, even occasionally, doesn’t matter, does it happen to you to support environmental organisations or environmental issues at all or not?
Participant: When you say support is that just being, so approving of them or actually taking action?
Interviewer: Yeah, so kind of action so either, you know, finance, more financial, whatever, financial donation or like signing petitions, things like that?
Participant: There’s not many petitions that I have been asked to sign or that I’ve seen that I could sign in terms of an environmental issue. In terms of taking action or financial myself there’s not, I’m not really aware of many charities that I would support. I do support a couple of charities myself but they’re to do with like foreign aid and protecting children and animals to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay. And have you noticed anything in, you know, these kind of behaviours that we’ve just discussed, you know, the list that you had during the diary, have you noticed anything about these behaviours in those ten days at all or not?
Participant: In terms of my behaviour, if they’ve changed or not?
Interviewer: Whatever, yeah, whatever you’ve noticed about your behaviours during the ten days of the diary?
Participant: I don’t feel like much has changed to be honest.
Interviewer: No, that’s fine. Yeah, we’re not looking for any change but I was just wondering if there was anything?
Participant: No. So from the question, I’ve not thought about, I still, there was a question about discussing things about the environment which did bring something to light but then I never actually did discuss it with anyone. But I did think about it as I was filling in the diary but nothing actually did prompt me to change anything about my behaviour.
Interviewer: So it’s not something that you usually do in any case, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, exactly.
Interviewer: And what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you at all?
Participant: I think it’s just making a conscious effort to reduce sort of waste so even if it’s using your car just trying to cut down for yourself, so recycle a bit more, just pay a bit more attention to the environment and what we’re doing to it.
Interviewer: And personally how concerned are you with environmental issues?
Participant: I think there is a lot in the news that we read online at the moment that it’s making you think that is a big issue. I don’t know if you’ve seen it but there’s something about starving polar bears that I came across online a couple of days ago but it’s something that I have consciously thought about for a couple of years about the, you know, the way the environment’s changing and what we’re doing to it. And so, I know that for the most part people that I know do make a conscious effort to try and reduce waste that they’re producing that will harm the environment.
Interviewer: Okay. And would you say that environment is an important part of, sort of of yourself, of your identity or not?
Participant: I wouldn’t say it’s an important part of my identity but it is important to me that we do take care of it where we can.
Interviewer: And compared to other social issues how important is environment to you, social or economic, you know, health kind of issues, you know, any other things?
Participant: Yeah. So it’s not the highest thing on the list in terms of sort of social issues but it is very high up. It’s something that a lot more could be done about and it is something that I think a lot more should be done about as well.
Interviewer: And what kind of other priorities are sort of higher on the list for you and why?
Participant: Well my girlfriend is a student nurse so for me I hear a lot about the NHS so I think the way the NHS is run in the UK is a big thing as a social issue in this country at the moment. Also there’s been a lot about the refugee crisis in Syria which I think is big for myself at the moment as well. I’m a supporter of bringing in a lot of, you know, refugees. But I definitely think the environment is high up on the list.
Interviewer: What do you think in terms of time, are we already experiencing any kind of environmental problems right now or not yet, or is it more kind of abstract thing that will happen in the future, what’s your perception of it?
Participant: I think we are experiencing major sort of climate change caused by environmental issues.
Interviewer: What kind of things are these?
Participant: Obviously they say, you know, the icecaps melting which is changing polar bears, marine life up there. I think as well the amount of waste that we dump into the sea is a big issue. So I am a big fan of recycling because of that problem and landfill sites as well destroying parts of the country, generally things like that.
Interviewer: And do you think that the diary itself has activated any kind of, you know, thinking about this for you or is that something that you thought even before that, I don’t know?
Participant: It is something that I thought even before we did the diary.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s good, yeah. Because we were actually not seeking to change anything in particular in people, you know, it’s not an intervention, it’s just a, we just wanted to, you know, to see what people think, so yeah, that’s fine. And just a couple of last questions, do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues right now or not, and if not then would you like to improve anything?
Participant: I don’t think we know enough about what’s going on generally in this country. I know I’m, me myself I would like to know more about what’s going on and what we can do to, you know, to stop causing as much damage. So yeah, so definitely I would, I don’t think we know as much as we should, I think we should be potentially just be taught this at maybe a younger age in school or even just having it shown to us like maybe on the news there should be more about it.
Interviewer: So what kind of things do you think should be, you know, what kind of sort of, I don’t know what to say, maybe information or any kind of, what sort of things people would need basically to be able to be, you know, more helpful to the environment?
Participant: Yeah. I think when things are shown about what’s, so what we’re doing to the environment and the ecosystem everywhere, I think it just shows about the damage, it doesn’t show what you can do to help. So obviously some things are general knowledge but there may be things that we don’t realise we’re doing that are harming the environment so I think just show, like when it’s maybe a news story it may be helpful to show what we can do to help. It should just be more of a social issue than it is.
Interviewer: Interesting, yeah. And do you think that people receive enough support to be environmentally friendly from the government, from environmental organisations or even private companies?
Participant: I think where I live we do receive support. There’s not much of an incentive to do it but we do have the ability to be more environmentally friendly. Like the public transport in Manchester is very good so you can get a bus, well so we might have to take two or three but you can get a bus to anywhere in the city. The rail network is very good in Manchester as well. Most places do have recycling bins provided per household and there are sort of larger bins for clothing waste, the shop that’s taking clothing waste so it doesn’t go to landfill sites and that’s recycled. So there is the ability for people where I live to actually be a lot more environmentally friendly than they are being but there’s no sort of incentive or sort of reason for them to do it.
Interviewer: Yeah, great. Thank you. And are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment?
Participant: I’m, you know, I feel like I do more than some people that I know but I would like to do more.
Interviewer: And what kind of things would you, you think you would be able to do, you know, in addition to what you are already doing?
Participant: I think I rarely use a car but I could cut down on some sort of uses of a car, like maybe if I’m being a bit lazy or like I say running a bit late I will ask my mum or dad to drop me off somewhere, where I can easily walk in just a bit longer time. I think we can cut down a lot of use, you know, sort of electricity usage in our house, that is something that I consciously try to reduce.
Interviewer: Yeah, great. And just the last question about your neighbourhood, a very quick one, what is good, you know, in your neighbourhood what do you appreciate and maybe on the opposite side something that you would say is a bit of an issue in your neighbourhood?
Participant: I think where I live there’s a lot of sort of green, a lot of it is protected so trees are protected where I live. We have a lot of trees called silver birch which can’t be destroyed so if there is any construction they have to get environmental agencies in to assess the tree, potentially if it can be moved it’s relocated but we have a lot of parks which is quite a good thing. But there are, there is sort of more and more construction work going on where I live and there are updates so a lot of it is tending to start to be cut back and destroyed.
Interviewer: And is there any kind of litter related issues or not, not really?
Participant: What, litter related?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: There is some litter so a few years ago it was quite bad but there was a lot of bins installed. So the government started coming out to schools when I was just leaving high school so they were coming in and just telling us about what litter does, just trying to get us to stop throwing litter on the floor. But there are local bins now sort of on every street corner where you put your litter.
Interviewer: Great. Thank you very much.