Interviewer: So the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It was OK, it got a little, it got a little bit monotonous, I think, yeah, of course when you’re filling the same, when you’re looking at the same thing, and I think that my routine had changed, has changed sort of last week from my usual routine as well, so yeah, it was OK, it was OK, it was pretty straightforward. So yeah.
Interviewer: Did you say that your usual routine just didn’t change that much on those 10 days, is that right?
Participant: Well, I felt, I noticed more my shopping routine had changed because of, I was in town a lot more on a training course rather than just going to my usual job, so that, the diary actually highlighted my shopping routine had changed, so yeah.
Interviewer: We’ll speak in a minute, maybe, about, you know, your typical shopping routine, so maybe again about the diary itself…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …was there anything that you found, you know, particularly easy to do, what did you like about it?
Participant: What did I like, what did I find it easy? I’ve got nothing to say if it was easy or not, it was, I didn’t find it easy or difficult, I just found it OK. I did notice, maybe this is too soon, but like I noticed it seems to be me, I’m the only person that ever does any shopping in this house, that was highlighted, I noticed that.
Interviewer: Could you repeat that again?
Participant: Yeah, sorry, I’m probably jumping the gun here, but I noticed, because one of the questions was about other people shopping, and because there’s me, my partner and me daughter, and I noticed it’s only me that ever does the, that does anything, I’ve never really thought about it before, so it makes me realise.
Interviewer: So is that mainly yourself who does the shopping?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that’s fine, yeah, just because, you know, for some people it’s just not the case, so that would be not the case for your partner, for instance, if he was filling in the diary, so that’s why we asked that question, so that’s why…
Participant: Yeah, yeah. I just noticed it is me, I mean he works, he’s working a lot at the moment, I think it just highlighted that, you know, it’s just me that’s doing all the shopping, it’s quite, you know, and it’s extra work isn’t it, on top of your other life actually, you’re constantly thinking about food and what I’ve got to buy and what’s, the bins and what’s got to be recycled, it kind of highlighted all that stuff, actually, yeah, it highlighted all that stuff. So yeah.
Interviewer: And was there anything particularly difficult to write down?
Participant: No, I don’t think so. Oh actually, the question about the bags, like, when you go shopping and do you get bags from the store, but sometimes it didn’t seem to fit my answer, I don’t know, I found that bit a little bit difficult.
Interviewer: In what sort of…?
Participant: Like the two, the two, if you got double bags or, I can’t remember which question it was, it asks like, would you use two bags together was it, or something, I can’t remember now, I can’t remember, but I didn’t understand that question at first.
Interviewer: And was there anything surprising in the diary for you?
Participant: Well yeah, that it’s me that does all the shopping.
Interviewer: I see, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, that it’s me that does everything, actually it takes a lot of work on top of me day-to-day life, thinking about what I need, what I’ve got to get, you know, it’s, it really highlighted that for me because I’ve not really thought about it before, you just do it. And because I’ve got no car at the moment as well, I think when you put like, about getting there and it was always by bus or always by Metro because I was in town, or sometimes I get a taxi, yeah, it brought it up, and bloody hell, I seem to spend a lot of time thinking about what I need to do or something, or yeah.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you would like to add to…?
Participant: No, no, that’s fine, that’s fine.
Interviewer: So maybe the next thing we could speak about is your shopping sort of routine, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, so if you could just describe your typical food shopping trip, you know, typical for you most of the time.
Participant: Well, usually I do, I go maybe once a week to do a big shop, so, and then, and then when I’m in town, I will call and get a few bits just when I need them or go to my local shop, but last week, because I was in town a lot on a training course, I didn’t do a big shop until yesterday, I went over a week. So I noticed that I was going, so sorry, so that was different to my usual routine, you know, because I don’t work, I don’t work full-time anymore, so I do have a bit more extra time but normally I go for a big shop, and then I’ll be in town, finish work and I pick up a few bits, because Manchester’s obviously very, very big, and there’s big supermarkets in town, so, and I’ll pick up shopping then, but that’s my usual routine, but last week was a little bit different.
Interviewer: And how many times a week or month do you do the main shop?
Participant: Well it’s usually four, four times a week, sorry, four times a month, yeah, once a week. Sometimes I can go once for 10 days, it depends.
Interviewer: And top-up shopping, how often does this happen?
Participant: Each week, it’s when I need it, I can’t say, there’s no, there’s no definites for that, it’s when I need it or if I think, ‘Oh I feel like this meal today,’ or something, so…
Interviewer: Does this happen at least once a week?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, once, twice, maybe three times, yeah, once, twice a week, definitely, maybe three times.
Interviewer: What kind of stores do you use to buy food?
Participant: Stores?
Interviewer: Yeah, what kind of outlets, whatever that is, supermarkets or…?
Participant: Supermarkets, yeah, supermarkets. And my local shop.
Interviewer: And what is the supermarket that you use most often?
Participant: Aldi.
Interviewer: Aldi?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, and is that both for the main shop and for the top-up or…?
Participant: Yes, it is.
Interviewer: So when you need to top up, you still go…?
Participant: Go Aldi or Tesco, I like Tesco.
Interviewer: And why, for what kind of reasons is that Aldi mostly?
Participant: Aldi is cheaper for me, yeah, but I can’t get everything that I like from Aldi, so that’s why I do a top-up shop in Tesco.
Interviewer: And what kind of things do you need to get elsewhere and not…?
Participant: Well I like, I like foreign food, as in Japanese and Thai, so if I want to make something like that I’ll go to Tesco because we have those products in the Tesco, so if I feel like making something Japanese, I can go there and buy, but obviously Aldi’s just your basic food isn’t it, so that’s why I’ll go to Tesco, and sometimes maybe once a month I’ll go to the Chinese supermarket, the big Chinese supermarket to buy in things I want to cook that are foreign.
Interviewer: And the Tesco that you go for, is it a big one or is it a smaller one?
Participant: It’s, the one in town is small but it has a big foreign food section, and the big one I use has got a massive foreign food, everything, so it depends, it depends where I am.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Oh gosh, I don’t usually write a list, sometimes I don’t usually, I usually just go and I know what I need, I know everything that we need. So if I go to Aldi, I just walk down every, and walk down the aisles and I remember as I go from aisle to aisle.
Interviewer: And do you tend to kind of stick to replacing things that you need or is that a variety of things and then sometimes some extra bits that you decide you want?
Participant: Oh replace, replace things I need, yeah, or try different things. I think as well this week I’ve been, I’ve realised, I mean, it’s easy to get stuck, you know, in like the same, buying the same things week in, week out, you know, the diary’s, I don’t know, doing the shopping and thinking about it has made me, doing the diary made me think that, like, God, are we eating the same food, because, with my partner, [?? 09:33], gosh we, sometimes we seem to be eating the same things, you know, and it’s, it’s boring.
Interviewer: So do you normally tend to eat the same kind of thing, yeah, to buy the same things or do you vary, or it depends?
Participant: Well, no, maybe I have a couple of months having the same things and I’ll think, ‘Right, I need to change,’ so then try, try to change the diet, you know, change the meals to something else.
Interviewer: And do you find yourself kind of economical enough when you do not use the list?
Participant: Yeah, I’m really, I’m really economical with waste, I, with food waste, I do not like to throw food waste at all. So I will freeze things, freeze leftovers, use leftovers, you know, I’ll eat, I’ll always eat the leftovers, I hate wasting food. Money’s tight as it is, you know, without them wasting extra food so there’s never much waste.
Interviewer: What is important to you when you choose food, and what is less important?
Participant: What’s important is the price, oh it’s the main thing is the price. What’s least important, I don’t care about what brand it is, it’s not important.
Interviewer: And is there anything apart from the price that is important?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to supermarket?
Participant: Well now, because I don’t, because I don’t have, my car’s off the road, I walk or, walk or taxi if I’m doing a big shop or if Manchester it’s always the bus.
Interviewer: And before you used to take your car, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I used to take my car, yeah.
Interviewer: Is this a kind of temporary situation or you gave up the car?
Participant: Yeah, it’s, well it’s been about 10 months, but I will be getting, I will be getting the car back on the road but yeah. I’ve been doing this for about 10 months now, no car.
Interviewer: And do you usually go to buy food on your own or with someone?
Participant: Own, on my own.
Interviewer: And yeah regarding the food waste, you mentioned that you try not to have any food waste at home?
Participant: I really, yeah, I really try not to, only like I said, any leftovers and freeze it, put it in the freezer and we can eat it later, it’s one of my main, I don’t know, it’s something that’s quite important to me not to waste it, you know?
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you wanted to add to the food shopping…
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: …sort of topic?
Participant: No, that’s fine.
Interviewer: OK, maybe slightly changing the topic, I’m going to ask you a little bit an unusual question. If you could tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Supermarket plastic bag? Er, it makes me think of, of a rub… I would say rubbish bag, because I put, we put junk in it or, I don’t know, I reuse the bags to either use for, I don’t know, putting stuff in, junk or packing things away, so I always reuse the bags.
Interviewer: Anything else that…
Participant: No.
Interviewer: …it makes you think of?
Participant: I can’t think of anything, I can’t think of anything else.
Interviewer: And do you remember the point in your life when you came across these bags for the first time?
Participant: Honestly, I don’t remember. I don’t remember.
Interviewer: Was there a time that you remember when there were no bags at all, no plastic bags in supermarkets?
Participant: I can’t honestly, I don’t remember that.
Interviewer: So kind of, I mean have you tried to think a little bit about, you know, sort of what kind of context did it happen or, you know, maybe the earliest you can remember about plastic bags, anything?
Participant: I honestly, I don’t remember when, I don’t remember when we start, when we didn’t have them, I guess as a child I know we didn’t have them, I just remember, because I know my mum always used to use big shopping bags. But that’s it, that’s a long time ago, so only I can remember, always having shopping bags. I don’t know, maybe like, maybe, God, I don’t know, maybe about, I probably didn’t start shopping until I went to university, which is, by myself, which was about 20, 26/7 years ago, so I know there were shopping bags then, but I don’t remember before that.
Interviewer: But at that moment there were already plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah there were.
Interviewer: And were they free or were they, did you have to pay for them?
Participant: Free, yeah, free.
Interviewer: They were already free, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What type of bags do you normally use to pack your shopping nowadays?
Participant: Well I have, well I have a heavy duty, I don’t know what you’d call them, let me have a look.
Interviewer: Is it a kind of laminated…?
Participant: Yes, really heavy duty, like I’ve got some Sainsbury’s bags here, sturdy bags they’re called. I’ve got, so when I go to Aldi, I’ve got loads, I take a big bag of them because I always reuse, I always use the same ones because they last, they last a long time, I must have had these a few years. I don’t actually like, I don’t like using the thin one, it just seems such a waste of, you know, seems such a waste. I like to take my own bags, it feels better for the environment.
Interviewer: And is there any other reason for why you bring your own bags?
Participant: Well, I just waste, it’s just constantly wasting money because I’d have to pay, I’d have to buy the new bags, because if I do a big shop, you know, it’s, it’ll be a lot of, it’s just silly wasting, wasting money.
Interviewer: So does Aldi charge you for bags?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, it does, it charges you for bags.
Interviewer: And in Tesco, when you go to Tesco for top-up, do you take any, you know, single use bags there?
Participant: Sometimes, if I remember, but generally I’ll just use the, because I’m only getting a few things, I’ll just use the thin bags. And then when I get home I’ll reuse the thin bags for other things. But I don’t ever buy a, a reusable bag in Tesco. I don’t know why, I just don’t.
Interviewer: But you take the free one?
Participant: Yeah, I take the free ones, yeah.
Interviewer: And how often does it happen to you to take a free one? How many times a month probably?
Participant: Gosh, I don’t know, maybe, maybe every, well I think probably every three, three times out of four that I go there.
Interviewer: And how many do you usually take?
Participant: Well whatever I need, it’s whatever it is that I need.
Interviewer: So that could be how many, well, between?
Participant: Two, about one or two, yeah, just about two.
Interviewer: Yeah, and the bags that you use yourself, you know your own bags, they are, did you say that they are kind of sturdier type...?
Participant: The really, really heavy ones yeah, the really heavy, sturdy ones.
Interviewer: And they are big as well, yeah?
Participant: Massive, yeah.
Interviewer: And how many of those do you use for shopping?
Participant: If I do a big shop, like I went yesterday, because I spent about a hundred pounds shopping, so, and I used, gosh, I don’t know, maybe five of them.
Interviewer: Five of them?
Participant: Yeah, big bags, I just, because I got a taxi there, put them in the taxi, and taxi back.
Interviewer: And are they kind of supermarket bags yeah, bags for life?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because they’re supposed to last, they’re supposed to last you a long, you know, a good while. And these ones I’ve had, I’ve had a couple of years, so they are lasting.
Interviewer: And do you think the use of bags for life matches its name?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I think so.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s the case for most people as well?
Participant: I would think so.
Interviewer: And how does it happen, when you go shopping, do you have to plan on taking the bags with you or not?
Participant: Yes. If I know I’m going to Aldi, I know I need to take them. I feel like, it’s funny, I feel like, well I know because I’m going there, I will take the bags with me, but when I’m in Tesco, I feel reluctant to buy a bag for life there when I’m only getting a few things. I know it sounds a bit strange but I don’t, it’s like I feel good to take the bags to Aldi, but I would never think, ‘Oh I need to buy a bag for life in Tesco,’ when I’m getting a few things because I think, ‘Well I’ve already got bags at home,’ but maybe I just, maybe I just didn’t decide to go shopping, maybe I just, within town, I thought, ‘Oh I need to get a few things from Tesco but,’ so, do you see what my point is?
Interviewer: Mmm, yeah, yeah.
Participant: Am I making sense?
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely. And what is the reason why you think you don’t take those plastic bags…?
Participant: Well they’re heavy, they’re really big and heavy, so they’re not, it’s not convenient to just, they’re not convenient to put in your handbag, they’re big, massive, heavy things, so, it’s, you know, they’re really clumsy and stuff, so that’s why, it’s there for a specific reason. I mean, to be honest, they get in the way, you know, they take up room, they’re quite annoying but I have to keep them because I need to keep reusing them otherwise I’m just wasting money every time I go to the supermarket.
Interviewer: So basically when you are not prepared, it’s easier to take, so you prefer to take the small bag…
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: …single use bag and that’s it?
Participant: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And where do you store your, you know, big bags for life that you take when you’re shopping?
Participant: They’re in the, in the hallway, but, you know, they’re annoying, they’re big and because I’ve got quite a lot, they’re just sort of, they’re quite unsightly, but I just leave them, I just try and ignore them. Because I like, I do like to keep things, I’ve got a little bit of, not OCD, but I like to keep things kind of neat, so they don’t really fit in with my usual way, but I like to use them, so I have to put them somewhere.
Interviewer: Again, in your opinion, how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Well, really important because there’s sometimes you only want a couple of things and you need the small bags just to put them in, because not every time you’re going to go and get lots of things are you? So it’s not, I don’t know, because it’s not convenient to get a big, heavy bag for life bag every time you go to the supermarket, because sometimes you just pop in, get a couple of things and then, I don’t know if you’re going to go out later and you’ve got this big, heavy bag, it’s just not, it’s not convenient, it’s not good. So I do feel you need the thin bags.
Interviewer: And what do you think…?
Participant: But I think, I do think they should make you pay for them in every supermarket though.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, what would that…?
Participant: I don’t, I think that would be, I don’t like that idea, because what would you do?
Interviewer: And how do you reuse, if you reuse at all, you know, the plastic bags that, the thin plastic bags that you get in supermarkets, is there any kind of reuse that you do of them?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t know, I think just, if I’m taking stuff to the charity shop or, I don’t know, put a packed lunch in there and seal it, you just use a bag like that, just put things in. I have used them as a, if I’ve run out of bin, of bin bags, the black bin bags, I have used them as a bin bag if needed, if I’ve had to.
Interviewer: Do you know how many approximately of those you currently have at home?
Participant: I just, um, of the thin bags?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: Er, one. That’s it, I just have one.
Interviewer: Another thing I wanted to ask you about this, kind of related to this, is do you know what is a plastic bag charge?
Participant: No, I don’t.
Interviewer: Yeah, so just to let you know, this is a national charge of 5p for single use plastic carrier bags, so those thin ones that we have been speaking about, yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What do you think about this kind of charge?
Participant: For the very thin ones? I think, er, for the, I think it’s OK, 5p’s OK. I’m just trying to compare to what it costs in the Aldi, so I can’t, it’s OK, it’s all right.
Interviewer: How much does it cost in Aldi?
Participant: I’m just thinking, I think either about, are they about eight pence for a big bag? Or five pence, yeah, maybe about the same, yeah, it’s OK, it’s OK. I just know there are, I mean I’m OK with it, but I know a lot of people wouldn’t like it.
Interviewer: And do you find the introduction of this charge surprising at all or not?
Participant: No, I don’t find it, no, I think it’s OK.
Interviewer: And did you know that this 5p charge is actually coming to England in a couple of weeks’ time?
Participant: I didn’t know that, no.
Interviewer: You didn’t hear about this?
Participant: No I didn’t.
Interviewer: And did you hear about it already in other parts of the UK or not?
Participant: No, I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: Yes, Wales, Scotland and Ireland had them already for a while so now it’s crossed to England, yeah.
Participant: Uh-huh.
Interviewer: So what are your feelings about it, do you find it good or not as good?
Participant: For me, for me I don’t mind because I think we’ve got to take control of the environment and how much waste we’re using, so for me I think it’s a good thing. I think it will make you more conscientious about what you’re using and what not using.
Interviewer: And what is probably not as good about it, if there is anything?
Participant: Well, I mean just a financial aspect, it may only be five pence but some people are going to not like it, just the, I don’t know, just because once, when something’s been free and then it’s a charge, people are, I think people get angry over things like that.
Interviewer: And you yourself…?
Participant: No, I think, I don’t mind, I think it’s a good thing, I think I see too much waste, you know, I think I see like just taking too many bags when it’s unnecessary. So I think it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well to cut down on waste, trying to look after the environment more a bit better.
Interviewer: Is that the only sort of purpose?
Participant: I would, that’s my only, that’s my only thoughts.
Interviewer: Do you think it can have any social or economic impacts at all or not?
Participant: I don’t understand that question?
Interviewer: If you think…
Participant: I don’t know about, I don’t understand about the social, what do you mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, maybe if you think there will be any impact on the economy related to that, kind of financial impact at all, or not?
Participant: Er…
Interviewer: If the charge would any effect you know?
Participant: I don’t, I couldn’t say, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, that’s fine, yeah. And do you think that the introduction of the 5p charge will affect you or not?
Participant: No it won’t.
Interviewer: It won’t.
Participant: No, because I, like I said, I generally take my bags anyway, when I go shopping anyway. So, so it won’t make much difference to me.
Interviewer: And how do you think you will be doing then your top-up shopping at Tesco?
Participant: Well I’ll probably end up, I’ll probably have to, I’ll probably pay the charge for the bags because when I go to Tesco, it’s just usually passing, I think, ‘Oh I need,’ or actually, or it’s sometimes I go with my mum, she drives, I just won’t use a bag or put it straight from the trolley into the car.
Interviewer: So do you think you will change anyhow, you know, your current type of bag use or…?
Participant: Yeah, I’ll cut, I won’t, I’ll cut down just taking the bags from Tesco if I’m in the car with my mum. But that’s the only difference, because if I’m just passing, I think I’m going to have to buy a bag if I need a bag.
Interviewer: But what kind of bags would you use then or, you know, when you go?
Participant: I use the heavy duty ones.
Interviewer: I mean when the charge is going to be introduced and you need to do your top-up shopping?
Participant: OK, yeah, I’ll have to pay for the bag when, if I’m passing I’ll just pay for the bag.
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge will affect your shopping behaviour anyhow or not?
Participant: No it won’t.
Interviewer: Do you think it is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: No, because I do, I think I’m pretty, well, I mean we can all be more environmentally friendly can’t we, but I don’t think it’s, it won’t change, I won’t change my behaviour because I don’t really waste much baggage now anyway, so I don’t think, that’s not going to change very much.
Interviewer: And do you think there will be any other changes after the introduction of the plastic bag charge, for example in your local area or…?
Participant: I don’t understand the question.
Interviewer: Do you think there will be any other changes after the plastic bag charge comes to effect in England, do you think there will be any impact, for example, on the local area or for the country in general?
Participant: I don’t, I don’t, I’m sorry, I don’t understand what kind, I don’t…
Interviewer: Yeah, maybe things like, yeah maybe things like related to urban environment, will there be any physical changes in urban environment when people will need to pay for bags or not?
Participant: I don’t, maybe, maybe, I don’t, maybe, I don’t know, maybe. I don’t know, I mean to be quite honest, I think the situation with recycling anyway, at the minute, is bad.
Interviewer: Is it?
Participant: I do yeah, I think, for example, my, you know, my council only take my dustbin once every three weeks, and, and I end up with too much rubbish and nowhere to put it, and I’ve noticed, like, in the, just, you know, in the country I’ve noticed that a lot more people are just dumping rubbish, and that’s, that’s not a good thing, that’s bad for the environment, and I’ve noticed like people just dump lots of carrier bags with rubbish in it, so, I know that’s kind of a separate thing, but I don’t think the way rubbish is dealt with is a good thing in this country, I think it’s bad.
Interviewer: What do you think can be done in this respect to make it better?
Participant: I think the council needs to put more money into emptying bins more, to stop, it’s called fly-tipping, isn’t it? People just dumping stuff. I’ve got absolutely, I’ve got bags of, in my garden, at the back of, of cardboard where the council have still not given me a bin, and it’s just stuck there, and I’m like what am I supposed to do with it? So, I don’t think we have good knowledge in this country about recycling, I think it’s not very good.
Interviewer: And how are your recycling facilities are like at the moment?
Participant: Terrible.
Interviewer: What kind of bins do you have?
Participant: Well I’ve only got a general waste and a bottle bin, I’ve still not got anything for green, and I still haven’t got anything for paper, and I rang the council oh time and time and time again for the past year since I’ve been living here, still not got anything. So therefore I don’t recycle like I should do because I don’t have the facilities. And I don’t have a car anymore to take, to recycle to the, and what the council has done, they’ve shut down the tip, you know, the places, they’ve shut down recycling sites near my house, so it’s terrible and it’s, I think, I think they say one thing about, you know, recycling, let’s, I don’t know, maybe pay more for the bags that you say, but then they don’t provide the facilities for the households, I think it’s terrible.
Interviewer: And is that the case for your neighbours as well?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, for all of us yeah.
Interviewer: So for the area, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, the whole area, it’s terrible.
Interviewer: Do you think that, coming back a little bit to the bag use…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in England?
Participant: No I don’t.
Interviewer: Why do you think so?
Participant: I think there’s too many, I just, I just don’t think there’s a mentality, I just don’t think it’s something that’s pushed forward for people to do. You might see the odd advert or something or, but I don’t think it’s, it’s, it’s like a really important thing that British people know about, I think people are quite ignorant.
Interviewer: And in your opinion, should anything change in this respect?
Participant: Yeah, I think, I think there needs to be more education about recycling, but I think it has to, I think the government, the council has to provide better facilities. Otherwise people don’t bother, you know, people are busy with lives and thinking about I need to recycle this, recycle that, it’s, I don’t think people have the time, sometimes, can be bothered, I don’t think it’s that important, so…
Interviewer: Another thing I wanted to ask you about is, is the following. So basically, you know, the 5p charge that will come to effect in England…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …in October, it will not apply to certain types of bags, such as, for example, paper or biodegradable bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And also certain, you know, kind of outlets, and these outlets will be small retailers…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …small to medium retailers…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: ...and also corner shops and also…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …I think, you know, hot food outlets or…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …takeaways for drinks and hot food, and…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …also clothes. Do you think this is sort of the right situation?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I think it’s good.
Interviewer: So do you think that in those shops and for these kind of paper and biodegradable bags, the charge should not apply? Or should…?
Participant: I do think that, yeah.
Interviewer: You think that it’s fine to exempt it from…?
Participant: I do, yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you think so?
Participant: Because if, because it, because it’s not getting waste if it’s biodegradable, then it’ll just, well, you don’t have to recycle it, so yeah.
Interviewer: And how about, you know, those outlets that I’ve just mentioned now, so the medium and small retailers, corner shops and also takeaways and clothes shops?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Why should not they charge for…?
Participant: Because they’re not, I think places like that are not making much money anyway, so I think to, I think they need to get all the business that they can, so I don’t think they should be charging at places like that, for small businesses, no.
Interviewer: But clothes shops, I would imagine, that they do a lot of money, don’t they?
Participant: No, I don’t believe so, I think you should leave the corner, the little shops alone.
Interviewer: No, no, I mean the clothes shops, not corner shops, but…
Participant: The what sorry? Clothes shops?
Interviewer: Yeah, clothes, yeah.
Participant: Oh clothes shops, yeah, yeah, I think you should charge for clothes shops.
Interviewer: But for the small businesses, no, yeah?
Participant: Definitely not, no.
Interviewer: And what do you think about, you know, how plastic bag charge compares to other charges? For example, congestion charge, have you heard about congestion charge before?
Participant: No I haven’t.
Interviewer: Congestion charge is for the cars, it exists in London, it’s in the city centre in London which has, you know, poor traffic conditions…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …you know, very, very, very strong congestion, people need to pay an extra when they come into cross the area or when they come into it. It doesn’t apply on weekends, I think, and evenings, so it only applies on the times when there is, the congestion is strong anyway. So how do you think plastic bag charge…?
Participant: I don’t agree, I don’t agree with it, I think the government’s making too much money already on cars and tax and things like that, so I don’t agree with any charge like that.
Interviewer: Even if it’s better for sort of the city environment?
Participant: No, I don’t, I still don’t agree with it.
Interviewer: And another charge would be, not really a charge but a kind of deposit, it doesn’t exist yet, but it exists in other countries. When you buy plastic bottles, or things like, for instance, individually wrapped vegetables, you have packaging, so when people return these plastic bottles and packaging, in the beginning when they buy it they pay a little extra for it, maybe…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …and then they can bring it back and get the five, 10p deposit back, what do you think about that?
Participant: I mean I think we used to have something like that for bottles, like a long, long time ago, but, you know, it’s like, you know, people have got, are too busy to then taking things back and I think it’s just, no, I just think don’t give us more, I just don’t agree with it. It’s too much, people have got too much, their lives are too busy without thinking, ‘I need to take that small bag back to get my money back,’ you know, it just gets silly.
Interviewer: So if that existed, if that was in place, do you think you would be doing that?
Participant: I don’t know, it depends, it depends on how busy I was.
Interviewer: And again, the last question about the plastic bags charge…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …in, well, you know, the charge is going to come to England now, and what do you think…?
Participant: Yeah, the plastic bag, OK.
Interviewer: What do you think can happen in about 10 years’ time as result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Well I think it will be better for the environment, I think there’ll be less, because if they’ve got more biodegradable things, it’ll be much better for the environment.
Interviewer: So do you think that instead of plastic bags there will be more biodegradable materials?
Participant: Yeah definitely, I mean I do agree, yeah, biodegradable much better.
Interviewer: But do you think there will be more of that appearing or not really?
Participant: Do you know, I don’t know, I couldn’t say.
Interviewer: The next kind of, you know, thing I wanted to ask you about is a little bit, you know, those behaviours that we touched upon…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …there was a list of behaviours and I was asking whether you’ve done this today etc etc. So I’ll just ask about a few of them, not all of them. And the first one is, do you tend to save water at home?
Participant: Do I save, not, I turn taps off, I don’t let them run when I’m brushing teeth and things like that, have a shower, generally, rather than baths.
Interviewer: Do you have a water meter at home?
Participant: No, er, no I don’t.
Interviewer: Do you tend to save energy at home?
Participant: In what respect, I mean I turn lights off, you know, I don’t leave lights on when I’m not in the room, things like that.
Interviewer: And heating-wise?
Participant: I only put it on when it’s necessary.
Interviewer: And why do you do this?
Participant: Well it’s to save money of course! It’s all about money for me, I don’t really, it’s not really about the environment, it’s about the money, I’ll be honest.
Interviewer: Do you tend to reuse things at home?
Participant: Like, what?
Interviewer: This could be, for instance, if you buy something, you know, like something comes in pots, in tubs, do you tend to reuse?
Participant: No, not generally, no. Oh actually, no, I’m sorry, I do, anything that comes from the takeaway, I reuse the pots. So I wash them and use them to store food in, like the leftover food. So yeah, yeah, course I do, yes I’d forgotten about that, yeah.
Interviewer: And like magazines, newspapers, things like that?
Participant: No, I just get rid, just throw them away.
Interviewer: Do you look at packaging in supermarkets, is this important to you at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So it doesn’t matter for you when you buy things, whether it’s packaged or not?
Participant: No, it doesn’t matter.
Interviewer: For like fruit and vegetables is the same, yes?
Participant: I don’t, yeah, no, I don’t think about it, I just, if I’m buying loose things I don’t, I don’t ever put them in bags, I just put them straight into a basket.
Interviewer: And what, yeah, we’ve spoken about recycling, so regarding the driving…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …how often did you drive when you had the car?
Participant: Oh, well every day for work, or, yeah, I drove every day.
Interviewer: Was it only driving for work or was there anything else, I mean shopping obviously, yeah?
Participant: Well everything, I drove everywhere. I mean having a car makes you lazy, so I’ll just, I always, I drove everywhere.
Interviewer: So how do you now, what sort of transport do you use to get to work?
Participant: By foot, foot, train, foot, metro and bus.
Interviewer: And how are you finding it?
Participant: It was really hard in the beginning because I was used to driving, but, you know, now it’s no problem. I don’t think about it now.
Interviewer: Do you tend to walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Walk.
Interviewer: To walk, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How long can that be, how, what sort of, how many miles or minutes?
Participant: I don’t know miles, I may walk an hour.
Interviewer: So it happens to you to do that, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How many times a week does this happen?
Participant: Maybe twice?
Interviewer: And what kind of, you know, purpose is that?
Participant: Go to see friends, because it’s quite difficult to get there by public transport, so it’s easier just to walk, if the weather’s OK, I’ll walk.
Interviewer: Regarding the purchases again, do you tend…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …to buy or do you, does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly or organic or sustainable…?
Participant: No, I don’t, I’m not interested in that stuff because I think it’s too expensive.
Interviewer: So you won’t buy that in any case?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to support environmental organisations or environmental issues?
Participant: No, I don’t, I don’t, I don’t do that.
Interviewer: And why is that?
Participant: It’s just not, it’s not something that I’m interested in to be honest. They’re things I do support, but, I know, yeah, I mean, obviously I’m going to be honest with you, but yeah, it’s not something that I think, ‘Oh wow, I need to really do that.’
Interviewer: And what kind of, you know, charities, what type of…?
Participant: Anything regarding children.
Interviewer: Children?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Being, I don’t, I don’t know, maybe, I don’t know, I couldn’t answer the question.
Interviewer: Well, when, you know, if you’re pro-environmental or environmentally friendly…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …what sort of ways of doing can be…?
Participant: Well, thinking about, just thinking about things that are going to benefit the environment.
Interviewer: And for example?
Participant: Not throwing, well, being more waste efficient, not fly-tipping, that sort of thing.
Interviewer: And are you personally concerned, if at all, about environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: None of those?
Participant: No I’m not.
Interviewer: What does environment mean to you, generally?
Participant: Just where I’m living, the environment that I live in.
Interviewer: And what does that include?
Participant: I’m sorry, I don’t really understand the question.
Interviewer: So the environment that surrounds you, where you live, you…
Participant: Well, just the environment, I can’t answer it any further, it’s just the place where I live.
Interviewer: OK.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And compared to other, now you’ve touched upon this a little bit, so compared to other issues in modern society, such as social, economic, health things, how important environment is in relation to those?
Participant: It’s, I’ll be, it’s not as important to me, I think there’s a lot more important things going on in the world, like, you know, rape and murders of children constantly, rather than the environment, so I more concentrate more on this sort of thing. I do write to Amnesty International, but it’s always about children, so that’s my main focus. Honestly, for me the environment comes, I mean obviously, I know it’s important, but I can’t, I can’t do everything, I can’t focus my energy on everything, so I’ve made my choice, and my choice is about women and children.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, that’s fine. And why do you think for you it’s more important to focus on those?
Participant: Because people are getting, you know, hurt and damaged on a daily basis, and a lot of money’s being made from it in wars and things like that, so that’s why it’s more important to me.
Interviewer: And how about some environmental…?
Participant: Do you know what, the reality is, the environment is screwed anyway, the amount of companies that pump out stuff into the atmosphere and, you know, we’ve made a right old mess of the planet as it is, so, I think, I know we can try and change some habits for ourselves but, you know, I just believe what’s going to happen it’ll happen because of the amount of damage we’ve done anyway in this last century.
Interviewer: So do you have a sort of more kind of, how to say, do you think this situation can be changed?
Participant: I don’t know if the damage is not changing, we can’t go change it, you know, we can’t go back.
Interviewer: But is there anything that you think can be done to, not to further damage it?
Participant: Well of course, yeah, like, you know, change the pollution levels and all this sort of thing, but, you know, you look at countries like India and places like that, you know, how are they going to change the crap that they pump out into the atmosphere, so it’s all right first world countries doing it, but all the world’s got to do it, and I don’t believe all the world is in a position to do that, so…
Interviewer: And the fact that some of the environmental issues are directly related to health…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …like respiratory health and things like that…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …does this worry you?
Participant: No it doesn’t.
Interviewer: And for the future generations, for example?
Participant: No, well, I mean it does a little bit but not, I don’t lose sleep over it.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, OK.
Participant: Yeah?
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues…?
Participant: No, I don’t, probably not.
Interviewer: And is this something that you would like to improve or not?
Participant: Do you know what, I don’t, maybe? But right now I just don’t have the time. I know that’s kind of a lame excuse, but it’s, that’s my, that’s my honest answer.
Interviewer: And if you had more time, do you think you would be doing this?
Participant: Possibly, if I had more time, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think that people in general, you know, like people in England receive enough support to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: So what could change in that respect?
Participant: More education maybe. More incent… more incentives possibly.
Interviewer: Do you know what kind of incentives could that be?
Participant: Financial incentives maybe, I mean you know you said about returning the bags, the small bags and things like that, but for me, I don’t know if that would happen but, yeah, I don’t know, I’m kind of not, I’m kind of losing thoughts around the question, I can’t give any more answers than that. It’s quite hard this, you know, it’s not easy, being put on the spot, it’s quite difficult, all these questions, yeah.
Interviewer: Well it depends, yeah, it probably depends, you know, some people find it really easy to answer, so…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And regarding your neighbourhood, this is the last question, regarding your neighbourhood, we also, actually, you know, put a lot of time and effort in this, so, it’s not also very easy for us, if that matters to you, and a lot of money goes into it as well.
Participant: Yeah!
Interviewer: Into this research, yeah. So in your neighbourhood, what are the things that you like and what is sort of problematic for you?
Participant: The public transport is good, and there’s nothing, I don’t have any problems here. And I’ve got a lovely, I’ve got lovely, lots of green, a lovely massive park, huge municipal parks here, it’s a nice environment where I’m at.
Interviewer: And what is problematic for you?
Participant: There isn’t any problems, apart from maybe just the kids, like, kids hanging out on the street.
Interviewer: OK that’s fine, thank you.