Interviewer: So maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about, if you could just tell a couple of words about how you found the diary experience, you know, overall.
Participant: It wasn’t, I didn’t find it too bad, I just thought that spread over 10 days, some of it became very repetitive. You know, there was one section of questions that you had to fill the same questions in every day and that was a bit, sometimes when you’ve done the same sort of thing three or four days in a row, it’s hard to come up, because you had to answer that section, didn’t you? So it was hard to try and, without repeating anything you’d done the day before, it’s hard to come up with something original really.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s OK actually, even if it’s not the same thing. Some people have a bit more of a change probably in those 10 days than some others, it doesn’t really matter. Yeah, I do appreciate it, it’s a bit repetitive but also we’re trying to capture people’s shopping routine and, you know, 10 days is really short because some people actually do shopping once every three weeks.
Participant: [Laughs] It’s true, some people when they get paid monthly have a big shop, don’t they? That’s right.
Interviewer: Exactly, so that’s why, and what did you find maybe easier to do? Were there any aspects of it a little bit easier than others to do?
Participant: What, the survey?
Interviewer: Yeah, in the diary app.
Participant: It was quite easy in all honesty, it was simple and straightforward really, I just tried to answer it to the best of my ability but you did get the feeling sometimes that you were being a bit boring, a bit drab with nothing sort of changed for two or three days in a row.
Interviewer: Yeah, and was there anything tedious to write down, not necessarily because it’s repetitive but because of anything else?
Participant: No, there was the only section where you had to enter that same section 10 days in a row, that was the only tedious part but apart from that it was fine because depending on what answers you put in, it went in different directions, didn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, of course, and did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: OK, great. So maybe we just move to the next part and can I ask you to describe your typical food shopping trip, how is it like?
Participant: Pretty straightforward and boring really. I mean, we only go to a variation of two places, we do our main shopping in our local Erdington area where there’s quite a big Iceland so we do a lot of shopping in there and then any other bits and pieces my wife drives past Tesco on her way to work so that becomes the easy option.
Interviewer: How many times a week or month do you do shopping?
Participant: A main big shop for the frozen stuff and everything is once a week and Tesco she might pop in once or twice a week depending if we need topping up with anything.
Interviewer: And the big shop again, you’re doing it where? At Asda did you say?
Participant: Iceland
Interviewer: Iceland and then top up. So is this Iceland, is it a big one or just a standard one?
Participant: No, it’s fairly big, it stocks a fair amount of stuff. The problem is where we are in Erdington there’s not really any big supermarkets without you travelling to them so that becomes the convenience. There is a Co-op in Erdington but it’s quite expensive compared to other places so Iceland is a good option and we seem to get most of the stuff we need there.
Interviewer: Yeah, and the Tesco that you mentioned, what type of Tesco is it, Metro, Express?
Participant: No, it’s a big one.
Interviewer: It’s a big one, so it’s kind of out of town a little bit.
Participant: Well, it just happens that my wife has to pass it on her way to work so she can just call in on the way home from work or whenever she needs something.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Pretty routineistic really, we generally, boringly I suppose, have the same sort of general foods that we enjoy most weeks. We might be tempted by something on offer another time but generally quite, very much the same routine all the time really. We certainly don’t plan a list out or anything because we both know in our own minds what we want and what we get through and what my son who lives here, what he has as well.
Interviewer: So basically is it kind of replacing the same products every week or are there different choices and different options coming in?
Participant: I’d say we’re pretty much the same routine really, use them, replace them, use them, replace them unless something catches your eye and you think, “I wouldn’t mind trying that” and you then you try something different.
Interviewer: And what kind of choices are made in this case if there is something different? How do you decide that there is something else that you would like to buy?
Participant: Well, you know, if something catches your eye, we don’t have to ask permission off each other. If Lyndsey sees something, she wants to try or wants to buy something she just does it.
Interviewer: But I mean, is it because of the price or is it just something that looks appealing?
Participant: Sometimes it’s down to the price, like if it’s a clearance or offers or anything like this and you think, “I wouldn’t mind trying that.” Otherwise something might just catch your eye if there’s a new display or something, you know.
Interviewer: What is important to you when you choose food and what’s less important?
Participant: Tend to go for brand names and quality really other than going for any cheaper options that you might think is a good idea but we just tend to go for brand names and quality.
Interviewer: And in terms of, I don’t know, particular labelling, anything like that?
Participant: No, just your general brand names to be quite honest with you, you know, well-known products.
Interviewer: Great and how do you travel to the store?
Participant: It’s a car journey so we just get in the car and go down to the main.
Interviewer: So that would be for both main shopping and also the top up, as you said?
Participant: Well, when we go to do the main shopping at Iceland, we just drive down as a purpose, a purpose journey. As I say, the Tesco one, my wife is passing on her way to and from work every day so that’s just a little stop off on the way really.
Interviewer: And for the shop you use the car is it because of the quantity of things that you buy?
Participant: It can be because sometimes we’ll have a big shop or sometimes we might not need so much but it’s just convenient just to take the car, in all honesty. It’s easy to park and it’s convenient.
Interviewer: Of course and so do you go, I think you mentioned that you compose the list together with other people in your family?
Participant: Well, we don’t really compose a list, we just know what we want and what we do, like you say, just sort of replace and top up.
Interviewer: So it’s not really a physical list that you take with you?
Participant: No, we never really take a list ever.
Interviewer: And in the shop, how do you co-ordinate who buys what?
Participant: Well, we just walk around together and have a look and if we see something, we have a, “Do you fancy trying that” and just have a little chat and then if we do, we do, if we don’t, we don’t.
Interviewer: Yeah and the top-up shops, is it both of you who do it?
Participant: No, just for the things, to Tesco, for the top up, then it’s just Lyndsey on her own because she goes past it going to and from work, it’s nowhere near where I go so she just does it on her own.
Interviewer: And how much of your food goes to waste every week? Does this happen at home first of all?
Participant: We don’t waste a lot to be quite honest with you, very little to be quite honest with you.
Interviewer: So do you tend to try and use everything that you’ve cooked?
Participant: Yeah, we tend to, because we tend to cook and buy really what we need other than just stockpile it really, in all honesty.
Interviewer: How do you manage to create almost any food waste, basically?
Participant: Because, like I say, a lot of stuff is frozen stuff so we just cook what we need.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, because you mentioned Iceland. So is it mostly because of this being frozen?
Participant: Yeah, a lot of it’s frozen and, like I say, it’s brand-named stuff so we just use what we use and then just put the rest back in the freezer and use that when we need it the next time.
Interviewer: OK, great. So now we’ll move to, you know, we spoke quite a lot about the bags that you use in the diary, so it’s now these kind of questions and one thing is a little bit unusual so I would like you to, if you could tell me five words or expressions, a number of words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag. What does it make you think of?
Participant: Hmm, well, sometimes it’s an essentiality, isn’t it, to be able to, what I feel sometimes is when you go to somewhere like Tesco or Asda, you’re almost having to ask for bags where when you go down to Iceland they’re just openly on the counters, galore for you. They don’t sort of encourage you to have a bag for life or anything although they are there for sale but they don’t, they just throw bags on the table and let you help yourself.
Interviewer: OK and what else does supermarket plastic bag make you think of?
Participant: I suppose the recycling of them, I suppose. I don’t know really, to be honest, I’ve never really thought about them, they’ve just always been there so you just sort of use them, don’t you? If you just, on the spur of the moment and you decide to go and get something from a shop, they’re always there for you, aren’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah and coming back to that thing that you said, you know, in Iceland that they are quite freely available, are they also a better quality than in other supermarkets or not? Or are they exactly the same?
Participant: I feel that they’re larger.
Interviewer: This is what I also remember from years ago, yeah.
Participant: I think they’re larger, I think that’s mainly to get more into them, for some of the frozen products obviously are bigger than others, aren’t they? I’ve noticed that the Tesco bags these days are quite small, I don’t know if it’s aiming to you to discourage using them or not, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And in Iceland, they’re free as well, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, not going to be for much longer though, are they?
Interviewer: You know about this already, yeah?
Participant: Our local shop on the corner is a Co-op convenience shop if you need to get a newspaper or something, they’ve got a big sign up now saying what’s happening.
Interviewer: Oh, right, we’ll come back to that question.
Participant: Sorry to spoil that.
Interviewer: And do you remember that point in your life when you came across the supermarket plastic bag for the first time?
Participant: Do I what sorry? What was the first bit?
Interviewer: If you remember the point in your life, the time in your life, when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time.
Participant: Hmm, it just became convenient, didn’t it, because years ago when we used to shop when we was younger, there used to be piles of cardboard boxes at the end of the, I don’t know if you remember that but you used to be able to just put your stuff in a cardboard box and put it in the car. That’s going back a few years, I don’t think there’s any supermarkets do that anymore.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s true and do you remember when the bags appeared?
Participant: No, I don’t, actually. It’s been a few years, I dare say, but no, I didn’t really.
Interviewer: And how did you come across it? The memorable point at where you, you know, you started using it probably?
Participant: I don’t know what to say to that to be quite honest with you, they just seemed to be just to be there, didn’t they, you know, readily available. I can’t put a pinpoint on the point when it actually dawned on me that they were there.
Interviewer: So it’s kind of between the time when no bags were, there were still no plastic bags.
Participant: No, there wasn’t.
Interviewer: And then suddenly they appeared. Was it like a very sudden change or not?
Participant: It was certainly a surprise to suddenly get a free bag to take your stuff home in considering in the days gone past you always had to take like a big shopping bag or people had them pull along trolley things, didn’t they, to put the food into. Like I say, they used to have cardboard boxes galore at one time.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, and how do you pack your shopping nowadays? We spoke about these Iceland bags, yeah? So do you use those or do you use any other types of bags?
Participant: We have got a couple of bags for life which we do take with us if we’re purposely going shopping but if suddenly you decide, while we’re out, we need to go and get some stuff, then obviously it’s easier than just to pick up a bag in store, isn’t it?
Interviewer: And these bag for life that you keep at home, what kind of bags are they? Are they plastic bag for life?
Participant: Yeah, they’re the plastic bag for life, the ones that you get, we had them from Tesco I think it was.
Interviewer: And what do you do with them at the end of their sort of life?
Participant: What, when they’re no good?
Interviewer: Yeah, when they’re broken.
Participant: Well, they replace them for you, don’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah, so you ask them to replace them?
Participant: Yeah, take them back to the shop and they replace them for you.
Interviewer: And do you use any other types of bag for life, you know, the canvas or?
Participant: No, to be brutally honest, no.
Interviewer: So just those that you replace for free, basically, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you that you forget them, did you mention?
Participant: Yeah, if we’re planning to go shopping we’ll take them with us but if we’re out and we think, “We could do with going to get something” or just think of something you need to go and get, something like a top up, then well, no, just use a free plastic one.
Interviewer: And when you go for a big shop you usually have them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And does it, you know, do you feel any difference in being inclined to take another bag if they’re available at self-service or the cashiers? Differences between those or not really.
Participant: With Iceland, like I said, they seem to have piles and piles of them at the end of the counter and it’s just so easy for you to just pick another one up. They’re very forward in piling them up for you to use so it just seems easy if you just want to pick one up, pick one up. But that’s just one example of one shop, I’m not saying all shops are the same.
Interviewer: Yeah, and why do you think bag for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well, they say it’s to stop all the, well, they want you to use them forever don’t they, when they’ll keep replacing them when they’re no good and obviously a bit of an impact on the environment, we’ve still got all these plastic bags to dispose of.
Interviewer: So do you think that they recycle them, the shops?
Participant: Well, I hope they do.
Interviewer: So do you think the bag for life, the way people use them matches their name?
Participant: Yeah, they wouldn’t last for life, would they, if you have to keep getting them replaced, but I think the aim of it is the right idea.
Interviewer: OK, and is there anything about bag for life, again, that you find not as good, not as convenient?
Participant: No, I think they’re quite good, actually.
Interviewer: How do they compare, for example, to better quality like Iceland, for example, single-use bags?
Participant: They’re far better than the single-use bags, far better, more stronger and made to last a bit longer.
Interviewer: And why are you not using any kind of other bags, your own bags that you have at home?
Participant: We don’t really own any, to be quite honest with you, worth taking to carry shopping in.
Interviewer: Right, and where do you store bags at home, sorry, where do you store bags generally when you go food shopping, where do you take them from?
Participant: They’re in one of the kitchen drawers.
Interviewer: And is that easy to remember when you go food shopping?
Participant: Yeah, we know exactly where they are.
Interviewer: In your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I suppose it is a good idea to have them but it’s something that I think we all abuse because it’s so easy just to pick one up, other than to take your other bags with you. I mean, it’s convenient when you just decide to go in and get something on the spur of the moment, obviously to carry it home in but sometimes I think it’s made too easy.
Interviewer: And what if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores, how would you find it?
Participant: I’d probably find it an inconvenience to be quite honest with you.
Interviewer: Would you think this would be an inconvenience, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I do, yeah.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because, you know, like I say, spur of the moment you had to stop and go and get something, you know, your options then, how do you carry your stuff home? You’ve got to have something.
Interviewer: Yeah, do you think, could that be dealt with by people bringing their own bags?
Participant: Well, yeah, but like I say, if you’re, like I say, we only take our bags with us when we know we’re going to go shopping but if you stop on the spur of the moment to get something and then that something becomes two or three items, then you know, I think they should be available.
Interviewer: Sure, do you reuse the single-use bags that you sometimes grab, do you reuse them at home at all? At home or anywhere else.
Participant: My son and myself use them for taking our stuff to work, our food and our things that we need for work so that’s what we use them for.
Interviewer: And is that the only use or is there anything else that you use them for?
Participant: My son puts his football boots in them.
Interviewer: Right, not like bin liners or anything like that?
Participant: No, not really, no.
Interviewer: OK, great. Another thing I wanted to ask now is precisely, do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, I do now because of that sign in the shop around the corner.
Interviewer: Was it the first time that you came across a plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah, it’s the first time I’ve ever seen it, yeah.
Interviewer: And have you heard about other places in the UK where the charge was already in place?
Participant: There has been one or two places we’ve been into and they’ve charged us, I’m not too sure where that was but, yeah, we have been charged for a bag in the past.
Interviewer: Somewhere in the local area or across the UK?
Participant: Yeah, I think it might have been across the UK when we’ve been away for a weekend or something.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and so you said that you’ve just heard about the plastic bag charge coming in England from Co-op, and was it, did you say it was a newspaper or was it kind of Co-op news, local?
Participant: No, they’ve got it as a poster inside the shop telling us that it’s going to be from something like the 10th of October, something like that, and it’s going to be 5p per bag from that day onwards.
Interviewer: Right, and were they sounding positive about it?
Participant: The thing is, I think people will pay it if they have to, they will pay it, probably begrudgingly but they will pay it, I dare say.
Interviewer: So what do you think yourself about this 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I just think, in theory, it’s like another tax, isn’t it really?
Interviewer: Is this going to be a good thing or not so good?
Participant: For the customer, I don’t think it’s a good thing but for these, whoever, somebody’s gotta be making money out of it so it’ll be good for them.
Interviewer: But for the customer it won’t be as good?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: Do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: And why is it not?
Participant: Other countries do it, don’t they, already so once one does it, I think it’s just going to follow on.
Interviewer: Yeah, OK, and what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I suppose environmental issues, isn’t it? They’re not easily recycled, are they? I’m not too sure.
Interviewer: So what happens to them?
Participant: I don’t know. Are they land filled or something? I don’t know.
Interviewer: Something like that and do you think there are any sort of social purposes or, I don’t know, economical impacts that can happen after the introduction?
Participant: I think people will pay it if they have to and they will still be bought, I dare say. If this money goes towards helping the environment, I don’t know if it will or will it just go to the profits?
Interviewer: And what do you think about the impacts on the urban environment, will there be any?
Participant: I don’t think there’ll be to that greater degree what they might thinking. I think it might have a small impact but I don’t think it’ll be too great an impact.
Interviewer: And what kind of impact would that be?
Participant: Well, if there’s less to landfill or less to dispose of, it’s going to be a good thing I dare say.
Interviewer: Litter basically, yeah? And do you think that the plastic bag charge in England will be able to fulfil these purposes for what you’re feeling about it?
Participant: I’m not too sure if they will to be quite honest with you. I still think people will end up buying them so I don’t, I think it probably will reduce it but not by as much as what they think. Or maybe it make people think about reusing the ones from last week or, you know, taking some with them a bit more.
Interviewer: OK, and do you think the introduction of the plastic bag charge will affect you personally or not?
Participant: It’ll make me think about taking the ones with me more often, I must admit but there’s gonna come a point where you’re gonna have to buy some because you’ll be in a situation where you’ll need to.
Interviewer: Absolutely. So do you think you will bring your own bags more often?
Participant: Yeah, I do.
Interviewer: How do you think you will adapt to it?
Participant: I think I’ll probably get a couple more of them bag for life and use them more often, to be quite honest. I know it doesn’t sound like much, 5p, but if you’re suddenly having four or five bags and it’s happening week in and week out, then it’s, it pays in the long run to get the bag for life, doesn’t it?
Interviewer: Do you think you will be able to adapt to this change easily and quickly?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, I think so, easily and also if you are in a point where you have to buy one, you will buy one but I don’t see a problem in changing to it at all.
Interviewer: And do you know which date it’s actually coming in?
Participant: Is it October 10th or something like that? Or the 5th?
Interviewer: It’s the 1st.
Participant: Oh, is it the 1st, is it?
Interviewer: Very close and do you think the plastic bag charge will change your shopping behaviour, you know, the shopping patterns that you currently have or not?
Participant: Probably not, no, in all honesty.
Interviewer: It will be the same, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So just a little change in the bag use, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, that’s right, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think the plastic bag charge could make you a more environmentally-friendly person?
Participant: No, I don’t think it’ll change my attitude at all, to be quite honest.
Interviewer: Why do you say so?
Participant: I don’t know, I’ve never been brought up in an age where that mattered, I think, being 55. It’s just, I don’t think it’ll change my attitude at all.
Interviewer: Say it again please.
Participant: I don’t think it’ll change my attitude at all, to be quite honest with you.
Interviewer: And why do you think it’s related to generations?
Participant: Well, I think they’re trying to make more younger generation people now more involved in saving the planet and recycling this and recycling that, whereas in my generation, you didn’t sort of do that, you just threw things away and that was it.
Interviewer: Yeah, OK, thank you very much, and do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in England?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Or in the UK.
Participant: No, I don’t, no.
Interviewer: And why, what makes you say so?
Participant: Because of how easily and readily available they are anyway, you don’t think twice about having to take extra bags with you. I mean, is it Tesco used to give you some points if you used your, reused your bags, they’d give you five points or something for every bag you reused which was a bit of an encouragement really.
Interviewer: And should anything change in this respect, do you think?
Participant: Yeah, like Tesco giving you some of their points, it does give you a little bit of encouragement to think, “Why not? Because in the long run, those points will make money off for me or something.”
Interviewer: So which of these strategies actually will be, from your point of view, more helpful? Adding a few points when you reuse bags?
Participant: Yeah, I do, I think rewarding us for reusing them is a good idea.
Interviewer: As compared to the charge, how would that be?
Participant: Well, yeah, I think that’s, you would offset it I think if you brought more bags with you because, you know, if you bring four or five bags to do your weekly shop and they’re giving you something in return for doing it, then you know, it’s not impacting on me having to buy another four or five bags, so I think it’s a good idea.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Another thing I wanted to ask you about is the following. Basically, we have the information that the plastic bag charge in England will not be applied to all kinds of stores and all kinds of bags.
Participant: Will it not?
Interviewer: No, it won’t be and there will be some exemptions.
Participant: Oh, right.
Interviewer: The exemptions are, for example, small retailers, corner shops, like that, also takeaways for hot food and drinks, clothing shops potentially, I think, and also paper and biodegradable bags. Would you say this is fair or should all shops and all bags be charged in this case, in your opinion?
Participant: I think that’s quite fair, actually, to help smaller corner shops and takeaways and things, yeah, I think that’s a good idea.
Interviewer: I see, so you mean in terms of basically everyone basically should pay the 5p everywhere?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, thank you, and also we have another question about different types of charges. So how does plastic bag charge compare to first of all congestion charge, you’ve heard of it, yeah? What exists in London currently?
Participant: I don’t agree with congestion charges.
Interviewer: You don’t agree with them?
Participant: No because I think we pay enough road tax and petrol tax and every other tax there is.
Interviewer: Sure, and how does that compare to plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, again, I still think that’s another tax in theory but if they’re going to implement it, they’re going to implement it, aren’t they? So we don’t have a lot of say in it, we can’t refuse to pay unless you come with your own bags all the time.
Interviewer: If you imagine a charge which actually doesn’t exist at the moment in the country but it does exist in other places, for instance in Germany, it’s a little deposit that people pay for drinks that they buy in plastic bottles and when they bring the plastic bottles back to the outlet they get the deposit back, it’s probably something like 5p or 10p again. How does that compare to plastic bag charges?
Participant: Well, you see, that what you’ve just said there, that used to happen when we was kids, when you used to have a bottle of pop, they used to give you 5p back on the bottle if you took the bottle back so really, in my generation when we was younger we already knew what that was about and that was quite an encouragement for you to take them back. So I think that’s quite good.
Interviewer: You would like that, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think that will help the environment as well?
Participant: I think it would encourage people to take things back and have them reused again, definitely.
Interviewer: OK, great, and what do you think will happen, let’s say in 10 years’ time after the plastic bag charge is going to be introduced now in England, what will be the impact in 10 years’ time down the line?
Participant: It will become accustomed that people have to buy them and they might be cut down the use of them and therefore it’ll cut down the wastage and the disposal of them all. It will help in the long run, in my opinion.
Interviewer: So this is all about the bags that I wanted to ask about so now we’ll move more towards you remember probably in the diary there was a list of different behaviours that we were asking, “Did you do this today? Did you do that today?” So we won’t speak about all of them but a few of them and I’ll be asking about a few of them, whether you do that, what it is exactly that you do and that you give examples why and also if it’s a habit or if it’s a more sort of thing that requires thinking through and planning, OK?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So one of these things is saving water at home, so do you tend to save water at home?
Participant: Well, I’m never one to have the tap running while I’m brushing my teeth, I never have done, I just switch it on when it’s needed.
Interviewer: And is there anything else that you do for the water saving?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Are you on the water meter?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: You are not, so you pay a fixed charge?
Participant: Hmm-mm.
Interviewer: Do you think this is more economic for your situation?
Participant: It is for us, I think, yeah.
Interviewer: OK, and regarding the energy use, how does that work? Do you tend to try and save energy at home?
Participant: We’re probably as guilty as everybody else that we leave everything on standby when you shouldn’t really, I know that but we do turn lights off when they’re not needed and things like this but we don’t do nothing major to save electricity to be honest with you.
Interviewer: And how about the heating?
Participant: Well, the heating’s only on when we need it, to be quite honest with you, it’s not a thing that’s on all the time.
Interviewer: And is this something that you find, you know, habitual to do or not?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So some of it you also said that you forget to do it like standby things.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So would that require a little bit more effort?
Participant: It probably would, yeah.
Interviewer: And why? Would you be able to find no reason for it?
Participant: I suppose the most inconvenient one to leave on standby is the television and the Sky and things, isn’t it, because they take a while then to re-programme and fire up.
Interviewer: Sure and do you tend to reuse things at home?
Participant: Such as?
Interviewer: It can be anything, it can be, you know, whatever, the containers, something like jars or it can be newspapers, all kinds of things that otherwise go to the waste.
Participant: The only time we ever reuse any jars is when we, because I grow some of my own vegetables, is to pickle, you know, like beetroots or onions and things, that’s the only time we ever reuse them so that’s not on a regular basis, it’s probably once or twice a year when we do that but apart from that, no, the rest of it goes into the recycling bins.
Interviewer: OK, and do you look at packaging in supermarkets? Is this important to you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So you don’t really mind the way a thing is packaged or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: You won’t be looking at it?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: OK, and coming to the household waste, what do you regularly do with the household waste?
Participant: Well, it’s only in the last month or so that we’ve had new wheelie bins delivered.
Interviewer: What kind of bin is that?
Participant: There’s a recyclable one and there’s one for household waste so the one you put in your bottles and your jars and your newspapers and cardboard.
Interviewer: Is it all mixed?
Participant: No, it’s got a separate section at the top for papers and cardboard and then underneath that we just slide it over and drop your bottles and your glasses and your tins and that makes it so much easier and it does encourage you really just to go outside and drop it in the bin.
Interviewer: Is that provided by the council?
Participant: Yes it is, yeah. It’s only a recent thing.
Interviewer: Interesting, I have never come across this type before, and what other bins are provided by the council? General waste I would imagine, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, well, there’s just the two, there’s that recycling one and then there’s the general household waste one.
Interviewer: And that’s all, nothing for garden waste?
Participant: No, if you want garden waste you have to pay extra for it, it’s another £35 a year.
Interviewer: OK, so what do you do with the garden waste or with the food waste?
Participant: Well, generally it just goes in the general waste most of it in all honesty.
Interviewer: OK, right, coming now to the driving, how often do you drive?
Participant: Every day to work.
Interviewer: Every day to work, yeah, and is it a long enough distance so you won’t be able to walk that? How many miles is that?
Participant: It’s about five, I think.
Interviewer: About five miles and does it happen, do you try to save car journeys at all, car trips or not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And when you go about not necessarily to work but when you go about other activities like, I don’t know, visiting friends who live close by, things like that, doing things in the local area, do you take the car as well?
Participant: Depending on the distance, if it’s just, you know, within a short distance, half a mile or so, I don’t mind having a walk or so but if you’ve got to carry things back or if it’s a little bit further then it’s always the car.
Interviewer: And regarding your driving, how do you drive? Do you try to save the fuel when you drive or do you not really think about it?
Participant: I just drive sensibly really, keep changing to a higher gear, keep the revs down and just drive economically.
Interviewer: Is this a habit again for you or is this something that you need to think about?
Participant: No, I just do it naturally.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, do you walk or cycle for short distances at all, does this happen to you?
Participant: Walk some short distances, yeah, don’t cycle.
Interviewer: And walking for short distances, what kind of things would that be?
Participant: Well, we’ve got some local shops which is about a quarter of a mile, if you ever need anything, just have a walk, that’s where that Co-op was where I seen the sign.
Interviewer: I see, and how often do you walk? How many times a week maybe?
Participant: Maybe a couple.
Interviewer: A couple of times a week?
Participant: Hmm.
Interviewer: OK, does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly cleaning products at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And any kind of, you know, food or products that are organic or sustainable?
Participant: Organic is just fresh, isn’t it? I tend to grow a lot of me own stuff so it doesn’t, I don’t do that to be quite honest with you.
Interviewer: So you mentioned that you grow, do you grow quite a bit of vegetables?
Participant: Yeah, I have a thing called an allotment.
Interviewer: Yeah, we know, yeah.
Participant: So, I’ve got a piece of land which I use.
Interviewer: That’s great, and without too over analysing, why do you grow?
Participant: I think everything tastes and is a lot better, there’s no additives. You can pay twice as much for stuff that’s organic in the shops, well, I can just grow it myself. It takes a bit of hard work but it’s fun, get out in the fresh air.
Interviewer: Do you use any, you know, chemicals or ingredients for that?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Not really, so it’s all grown kind of naturally?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you find it difficult or easy?
Participant: No, not really, no, no.
Interviewer: Not difficult?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: OK and in terms of sustainable food things like free-range eggs and whatever, I can  think of recycled materials, recycled paper, do you tend to buy any of those?
Participant: No, not really. Free-range eggs we probably do.
Interviewer: OK, does it happen to you to contribute to environmental organisations and, you know, help environmental issues at all?
Participant: Do I contribute to any of them?
Interviewer: Yeah, to contribute to them, to environmental organisations or to help any kind of environmental issues?
Participant: Do you mean manually or financially?
Interviewer: Both, yeah, either or.
Participant: No, I don’t really, to be quite honest.
Interviewer: OK and have you noticed anything in those behaviours that we spoke about and the list that you had every day, did you notice anything about these during the diary period at all?
Participant: Well, my main thing is, like the arrival of these wheelie bins, it’s made life so much easier to recycle things and really it encourages you because really, in the past, you just threw everything in a black bag, put it out on the side of the road, it’d get ripped to smithereens by the cats and dogs and everywhere would be a mess. These have been a godsend.
Interviewer: Interesting and before you didn’t have any recycling boxes at all provided?
Participant: We had some boxes but they was very limited. You put a box out and if it’s full of paper and a good gust of wind comes, the paper’s everywhere, with the bin it just keeps everything contained inside so, to me, that’s better for the environment rather than creating rubbish by trying to recycle.
Interviewer: Yeah, of course and what does environmentally-friendly behaviour mean to you at all?
Participant: Environmentally-friendly behaviour. That’s a good question, difficult one as well.
Interviewer: Being environmentally friendly, I should say.
Participant: Oh, dear, that’s a tricky question that one is. I suppose being environmentally friendly is to look out, to create less waste and less packaging on things and try and be a bit more like, it was one of your previous questions, wasn’t it? Do I look at the packaging? Well, in all honesty I don’t but really, I have noticed there are products where they are just selling the refills only so maybe I ought to look at something like that a bit more. It’s just too easy not to be in all honesty.
Interviewer: And is there anything else apart from these sort of waste questions that, you know, create a good impact on the environment or is there any other area you can think of?
Participant: Not really, like I say, with these bins it’s just far better for all of us, just to keep everything recycled. I can’t really think of anything else to be quite honest with you.
Interviewer: And are you concerned at all about environmental issues?
Participant: Hmm, it’s certainly worrying about this global warming and all this melting of the ice caps and things, that’s certainly a worrying issue.
Interviewer: And why is it, why is it worrying for you?
Participant: Well, it’s going to have an impact on everybody eventually, I would have thought. It’s going to affect weather conditions, I would have thought, and the poor people that you see on the news who are living up in the Arctic and things who are gonna lose their land day by day the way it’s melting.
Interviewer: And how do you think this could impact the country, do you believe?
Participant: I don’t think they will, to be quite honest, I don’t think people will think that hard about it. I don’t know, I don’t think it’ll impact us much at all but it is something that, certainly something to be addressed, I think, in some way, if we could.
Interviewer: So do you think by extension that it will affect more other places than Britain?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, I think so.
Interviewer: More than Britain?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, and what does the environment mean to you, in general? Is it an important part of your identity would you say so or not necessarily?
Participant: I think in my lifetime I’ve seen the environment get a lot cleaner and it’s certainly a bit healthier area to live than what it was when we was kids, that’s for sure. You know, with air cleanliness and less emissions from cars and things, it’s certainly a better, cleaner environment from when I was a kid. When I was small we used to have a lot of big factories in Birmingham, like plumes of smoke every day of the week, nonstop. That seems to be quite a bit of a thing of the past these days.
Interviewer: Of course, so there are goods and bads, basically yeah?
Participant: Yeah, at the moment it seems to be getting better.
Interviewer: So you think now it’s getting better?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Despite the car emissions?
Participant: Yeah, well, I think they’re less, aren’t they, these days with the eco-friendly engines and things, they’re a lot better than what they used to be.
Interviewer: OK and compared to other issues in the modern society, social things, economics, health, how important, you know, in that list of priorities is the environment for you?
Participant: Well, a healthy environment is a healthy person, I think, the more healthy the environment, the better your health is gonna be and the impact on us has got to be better for lifespan and things, I hope.
Interviewer: So would you place them on the same sort of priority level, health and environment or not?
Participant: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: If you were somewhere in the government, I don’t know if you are or not, I’ve got no idea, but if you were a decision maker, would you place them on the same sort of level?
Participant: Yeah, high priority, yeah.
Interviewer: And how about social issues and economics?
Participant: Not so much so, I think the environment and health would be the two main priorities to me.
Interviewer: And social and basically things like employment, salaries?
Participant: Secondary.
Interviewer: Secondary and why?
Participant: Because I think a healthy environment is healthier people and maybe, you know, work and earning a living is not the do all and end all, you’ll survive somehow. I think if you’ve got a healthy environment, you’ll have a healthy lifestyle.
Interviewer: I’m just checking my own understanding, did you say that probably people will be less indoors?
Participant: Less indoors?
Interviewer: No, that was not something that you said, so I was just checking.
Participant: No, I don’t think so, like I think the teenage generation these days spend too much time indoors. When I was a child, you was outside all the time.
Interviewer: That’s good, thank you, and do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: Probably not as much as I should do. I try to keep an ear out for what’s going on and what’s happening.
Interviewer: What could be improved then, if not?
Participant: What could be improved? That’s a difficult question.
Interviewer: Yeah, if you’re saying that probably you know, some of us do not know about the environment, you know, as much as we should.
Participant: Maybe more awareness to be made like advertising campaigns or something to bring it home to people a bit more.
Interviewer: Yeah, OK, and regarding the skills, do you think you have sufficient skills nowadays to help the environment?
Participant: Yeah, we’ve got a much bigger chance of helping the environment these days than we ever had, definitely.
Interviewer: What kind of skills would you say you have that are helpful for the environment?
Participant: What kind of skills do I have?
Interviewer: Well, you garden, yes?
Participant: Yeah, well, I think we’re more aware now of, like, on the recycling side and, you know, helping to get a cleaner and happier environment, definitely, but I don’t know what to pinpoint as an actual skill.
Interviewer: Well, for example, what we now can do with our waste, what we know, how to do it and so on.
Participant: I seem to think there are places now where they can recycle the food waste to create energy, I think, which is a good thing.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you receive enough support to be able, you know, to act pro-environmentally?
Participant: I don’t think you get encouraged to, to be quite honest with you. I think there could be a bit more done to maybe reward you for helping a bit more but in what way, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And what kind of rewards could those be?
Participant: I’m not totally sure, I’m just trying to have a think on that one. I’ve got to be honest, I’m struggling on that answer.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s OK, and do you think that legislation and regulation that currently exists in the environmental area support people’s environmental behaviour or not?
Participant: I think they could do a lot more to help and encourage people to help the environment more.
Interviewer: Could you, again, clarify just a little?
Participant: I think too many people are too easy these days just to throw rubbish on the floor and waste, just chuck cans and things away when it’s just as easy just to put them in a bin and I don’t think people think too much about it these days. I mean, I’ve been to other countries where the place is spotless.
Interviewer: So how could the government or environmental organisations help them not to do so?
Participant: I think a lot of it’s down to how you’re brought up and your manners and what you’re taught to do. If kids see their parents just throwing things out the car window, a can or something, they’ll think that’s right.
Interviewer: So is that education basically?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, I think that’s a good way of putting it, yeah, educating.
Interviewer: And are you happy yourself currently with what you’re doing for the environment?
Participant: I think so, I think so.
Interviewer: What are you particularly happy about?
Participant: Sorry to keep repeating myself but since the arrival of these wheelie bins we do a lot more recycling than we’ve ever done, things like some of the food waste and when I cut the garden grass, I take that to my allotment and make it into a compost heap, so I’m recycling that and putting that back into the ground to help grow my things again and that’s what I do and it suits me.
Interviewer: Yeah, and is there any kind of behaviours that you would like to potentially improve, or do something better?
Participant: What, me personally?
Interviewer: In terms of helping the environment.
Participant: I suppose we could all do less car journeys, I suppose, but again it’s such a convenient thing and we get so used to it.
Interviewer: Yeah, OK, and just coming to the end really of the questions so maybe one last thing is about your neighbourhood. What do you consider problems in your neighbourhood and what you feel good about, the positive side of it?
Participant: Again, I like the neighbourhood, it’s not a bad place where we live, it’s quite friendly people, you do get the odd disruption as a lot of people do but the shops further down that we go to sometimes could do with a few more bins to make the place a bit more tidy, encourage people not to throw stuff on the floor. Generally quite happy with how we are.
Interviewer: And for instance, regarding litter, is there anything like this, any kind of issues related to that or, you know, vandalism, whatever?
Participant: There’s not much vandalism, I must admit. There’s certainly a litter issue, I think so anyhow because there’s a couple of schools close by and I think if they put a few more bins out for the kids maybe they wouldn’t throw so much on the floor.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. OK, thank you very much. Do you have anything, I’ll just finish with a couple of demographics questions, but that’s all that’s left on my side, maybe you wanted to emphasis or to add anything? Has anything surprised you, I don’t know?
Participant: Not really, no, I’ve got to be honest, there’s nothing that’s jumped out and surprised me at all. I know it’s not helping you, sometimes don’t lead dynamic lives, it’s just a boring every-day existence a lot of the time.
Interviewer: For some it’s kind of, I guess the polarised points of view because some people are opposite, they were quite excited about speaking their everyday stuff, some people a bit less.
Participant: The only thing I couldn’t understand on that questionnaire thing was what sort of photographs.
Interviewer: What, sorry?
Participant: Photographs was you asking for, I didn’t know what you could have been sending on that. I know we sent the photographs for the receipts and things but it says, “Is there any other photos that you could be adding?”
Interviewer: So you didn’t understand the purpose of it?
Participant: No, I didn’t, no.
Interviewer: The purpose is just to see how people’s recycling looks like and how people’s shopping looks like, basically.
Participant: Oh, right, I see.
Interviewer: Yeah, what sort of things they buy. It’s a little bit additional to your descriptions, the images sometimes speak a bit better than words, that’s why.
Participant: I understand what you mean now.
Interviewer: That’s all, it just analysed exactly the same as the text would be so the same sort of way.