Interviewer: Well first of all, thank you very much for taking part.
Participant: No problem.
Interviewer: It’s a huge help to the project, and we really do appreciate it.
Participant: Well, I hope it was alright, it seemed a bit repetitive at times.
Interviewer: Well I was going to ask, the first question, how did you find the experience?
Participant: It was okay. I enjoyed doing it. There were times when I felt as though I was repeating myself, because, you know, sort of what were your reasons for recycling, or something to that effect, but no, otherwise it was fine. I mean, we had maybe a slightly not typical week in some ways, but no, I enjoyed doing it. It’s my kind of thing.
Interviewer: Was there anything that was difficult, or anything that we could be changing?
Participant: No, I don’t think so. No, not really. I thought it was fine.
Interviewer: Okay, excellent, and did anything surprise you when you were completing the diary?
Participant: In terms of my own reactions to it, or in any…
Interviewer: Yes, your own reactions.
Participant: Well, it did make me more mindful about certain things, and I did modify my behaviour, not because that’s what I thought I should do, but really just because it made me mindful. Things like boiling the kettle, I kind of looked into that after it had cropped up, and you know, and I thought, “Well what I’m doing doesn’t make sense now,” so I did modify my behaviour. So yes, it made me more mindful, in some respects.
Interviewer: That’s really interesting. Were there any other areas that you found, sort of, changes?
Participant: Do you mind if I just pause? Because I do need to think about these sometimes.
Interviewer: Of course.
Participant: It sort of drew my attention to things that I never think about. Things like turning the taps off in the bathroom when I’m brushing my teeth, because that, and so it kind of drew my attention to it and it made me think about it, but it didn’t make me modify my behaviour, I have to say, because I don’t know, it just didn’t. I would have to make a concerted effort to change something that I had been doing for donkey’s years, and that I sort of probably don’t feel makes a huge amount of difference anyway.
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: I don’t know, really.
Interviewer: No, that’s absolutely fine.
Participant: Is that alright?
Interviewer: Yes, thank you very much. Okay, so to begin with we’re going to be talking a little bit about shopping routines. So could you please describe a typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Right. My partner works full time, and works quite long hours and works hard, and I’m self-employed and I work from home, so I’m very much able to compile my own diary. So my usual shopping trip is a main shopping trip. There’s just two of us at home, and it’s probably about once a fortnight. There’s no set routine. I go, you know, I’ve got a normal sized fridge freezer and I cook fresh food, I don’t use ready meals or anything like that. So my main shopping trip would be to stock up on fresh fruit and vegetables, meat and fish for the fridge and the freezer, and also the usual sort of household things. So it’s probably about once a fortnight. I go on my own. I sometimes, I mostly, yes, I probably mostly make a list, just so that I don’t forget, sort of, the essential things that I need, but I will, it’s not a very specific list. So it will be a list, like, fruit and veg, meat, you know, I won’t necessarily break it down into everything, all the component parts. So the list is quite flexible. I will sometimes say to my partner before I go, “What do you fancy for your tea this week?” or, “Do you fancy this,” or, “What sort of meat do you fancy for the weekend?” or whatever. He doesn’t have massive input, he’s quite happy with whatever he gets most of the time, so I suppose I’m just paying lip service to him, really. He takes food into work for breakfast and lunch. Sometimes I will add that to my shopping list, sometimes he, when he goes for his paper in the morning, he quite likes to decide on the day what he fancies, so I don’t always buy all his, sort of, food for him. I always drive, really we live in Rhoose which is sort of 10, 15 minutes’ drive from Barry, which is where the main supermarkets are. There is a bus, but I wouldn’t dream of taking it, to be quite honest, for convenience, and because usually when I go for my main shopping, I’m combining it with something else as well, so I’m probably either going to the bank, or going to visit my mother in law, or whatever, so there’s usually, you know, another purpose to the trip, as well.
Interviewer: Yes. Which supermarkets do you go to normally?
Participant: Right. When I first moved here, because I’ve lived here about 15 months now, I was pretty much, I went to Morrison’s. I tend to stick, probably that is my kind of all-round favourite. I’m not an Asda fan and I’m not really a Tesco fan, although I’ll go there for convenience.
Interviewer: What is it about Morrison’s?
Participant: I like their fresh produce, I like the fact that they’ve got a proper butcher’s counter and you can buy all sorts of odd things there that you can’t, like pork cheeks and lamb bones and different, so you can buy some quite old fashioned, you can buy shin beef, which you can’t buy in the other supermarkets. So I like the variety they’ve got, I pretty much find their stuff is fresh, although we had a new Asda that opened, and I think that took a lot of custom from them, and I did find a time when their produce, I don’t think it was turning over as quickly, so you have to be a bit more careful, but generally as an all-round one, the car park’s really spacious, it’s convenient and easy to get to, they’ve got cash points there, they’ve got a Timpson’s there which I’ve used for key cutting, so it’s quite convenient in lots of different ways, really.
Interviewer: Yes, and when you’re shopping in Morrison’s, it sounds like you buy a lot of fresh vegetables.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Are there any other sort of things that you keep an eye out for when you’re shopping?
Participant: Well usually I’ll go round sort of a fresh, I mean, I do look out for special offers and things. I will, are you talking about in terms of what I look out to buy as impulse purchase?
Interviewer: Anything, to be honest.
Participant: When I go in first, when I go to Morrison’s for this big shop, I will sort of do the whole shop, aisle by aisle by aisle. We don’t buy, because I’m always on a diet anyway, and we haven’t got kids in the house, so we don’t buy a lot of fizzy drinks, we don’t buy crisps, we don’t buy biscuits. Very, sort of, minimal, it’s not on my usual shopping list. I’ll buy it if my, his grandchildren are coming, but otherwise, so I tend to sort of, I go down that aisle but I don’t stop, sort of thing. If I’m seeing goods that I usually buy that are on special offer, I will buy them if they’re not on my list, but I tend to just try and do that with things, sort of, consumables. So I’ll buy tea bags and loo rolls and sort of basic things like that. I try to avoid temptation in my cupboards as much as possible, so I really wouldn’t bulk buy, you know, biscuits or sweets or things like that, for the future, because they wouldn’t be left in the cupboard, they’d be scoffed, and that wouldn’t be…
Interviewer: I know the temptation.
Participant: So you know, my sort of shopping generally is mainly based around, sort of, you know, making meals. Yes, so things like rice and store cupboard things, if I saw them on a special offer, I would definitely pick them up.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: I’m quite focused, really. I know what I want, I know the sort of ingredients that I buy. I do look at price a lot, but I’m not swayed by price. I want the quality at the best price. That’s how I shop, really.
Interviewer: That sounds very consistent and clear. So that’s the main shop that goes every two weeks.
Participant: Yes, about every two weeks, yes.
Interviewer: Do you do top up shops, then, as well?
Participant: Yes, I tend to. I’d say, this week hasn’t really been typical because I’ve been on a meal replacement diet, so I haven’t cooked as much. I haven’t prepared as much food as I would normally prepare during the week. I tend to, I cook every night, so if I’m running out of fresh ingredients, I mean, things do, if you buy them fresh, which Morrison’s are pretty good, and I’m pretty careful, they do last quite a long time in the fridge anyway, but if I’m running out of, I don’t know, lettuce or something, or I need a particular ingredient for a recipe that I’m doing, then that will be, sort of, my top up shop, and then also things like milk, and any other bits that I run out of during the week, but they tend to be small-ish top up shops, really.
Interviewer: Would that be to Morrison’s as well?
Participant: No, no, I wouldn’t go there. I would go pretty well wherever was most convenient. It wouldn’t be a specific trip out. Well, if it was a specific trip out to get something, if I was in the house and I was cooking and I thought, “Oh I’ve run out of soy sauce,” I would nip out to, we’ve got a Tesco Express in Rhoose which is five minutes in the car, 15 minutes’ walk, so I would go there, but they’re quite expensive so I buy as little as possible there.
Interviewer: Overall, it sounds like a lot of cooking and stuff like that. Would you say that any of the food goes to waste?
Participant: I hate wasting food. I hardly waste any food at all. I usually cook too much, because I’m, it’s quite hard just to cook for two, so I usually will buy a 500g packet of mince, for example, so I usually am cooking four portions if I’m cooking something like Bolognese, and we will eat two. Sometimes I take a meal to my mother in law, otherwise I freeze it, so they’re a bit like our ready meals. I can, if we’re in a rush I can just get it out the freezer. If there are scraps left over, because either my, I mean, there’s some chicken curry left over from Saturday, that’s in the fridge, my partner will take that to work for his lunch another day. I will freeze, you know, single portions of rice. I tend to measure what I’m cooking anyway, so I don’t cook too much, but I will freeze it or I will eat it for my lunch the next day. We very, very rarely, it goes totally against the grain for me to throw food out, and I will always try, for myself, because I’m home during the day, if there’s something in the fridge that looks, you know, as though it’s, like lettuce or cucumber that’s not going to last, I’ll have that for my lunch. Or there was some veg last week, I made soup for myself with it, so, and I have a steamer pan, so if I have little scraps of broccoli or whatever, when I’m cooking veg I can just throw those few bits in there and cook it all together. So I waste very little food.
Interviewer: Lovely. Okay, thank you very much.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So now we’re going to be talking a little bit about plastic bag use.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: This might be an odd one, but can you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”.
Participant: Flimsy, thin, waste bin, pollution, throw away.
Interviewer: So there’s definitely something there about being thin and flimsy?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Would you say that you’re in favour, or that you’re a fan of using single use plastic bags?
Participant: I do use them because I reuse them as bin liners, and when I lived in England, which was sort of the year before last, you know, I was guilty of taking a good handful at the checkout and, you know, splitting my shopping between four bags instead of two, because I would reuse them at home and I don’t buy bin liners, basically. Now I’m here and I’m paying 5p for them, I’m a bit more resentful about it, about having to pay 5p for a bin liner, but, and so I, you know, I stuff as much shopping as I can into them, basically, if I buy them, and I do reuse them. I reuse them, I mean, last week I reused it numerous times. I think I used one in about five days for my kitchen waste and just kept emptying it and then bringing it back in to use again, but I sort of have this little feeling at the back of my mind that I shouldn’t be using them, but then I think I buy a roll of bin bags then and I probably wouldn’t reuse an individual very flimsy bin bag. I don’t know.
Interviewer: Have you looked into them? Buying specific bin liner ones?
Participant: A roll of bin liners? To be honest, we don’t use, I’m not a big fan of having a bin in my kitchen. I keep a bag on my back door and I keep emptying it all the time, and I think if I had a bin, I’d probably let things, I don’t know, I’m, I probably should get a bin and reuse them, but then I don’t know if I, I don’t know whether buying a roll of bin liners is better or any better than just making one carrier bag last for five days. I don’t know.
Interviewer: Better in which sort of terms?
Participant: Better for the environment, I suppose.
Interviewer: But you’re happy as it is with using the plastic bags?
Participant: Well I do use them, but I sort of have a little sort of pang of guilt that I should be taking my own bags to the supermarket now that, being charged 5p for them is making me more mindful of the fact that they’re environmentally not very friendly, but I don’t know how much better it would be to buy a roll of bin bags. Better for the environment, I mean.
Interviewer: So you mentioned bringing your own bags. Is that something that you’ve ever thought about?
Participant: I do occasionally, but I’m not very well trained. I’ve got two bags, they’re sort of bags for life type things, but they’re actually the woven ones, if you know what I mean, they’re not the plastic carrier bags. We bought them when we were abroad last year, and they’re really, really strong, and I’ve got those and when I remember, I do take them, but I would say I probably only remember about 20% of the time. For my main shop they’re great, because they kind of, they stand like a rectangle, and you can actually, you know, they hold their shape and you can sort of really pack them well in the trolley. I think sometimes because I’m doing other things when I’m en-route to my main shop, I’m distracted. I just haven’t trained, I don’t think I’ve trained myself properly, and at the moment I’ve got three or four carrier bags stuffed in my, sort of, handbag type thing, and then sometimes I find if I go to Tesco Express I just run out of the car with my purse in my hand, and I’ve left the bags in the car. So I don’t think I’m very well trained in it. I haven’t trained myself very well I think, really.
Interviewer: Where do you keep the heavy duty woven ones?
Participant: It’s slid down the side of my freezer at the moment, but I’ve actually got to kind of go and seek it out. It’s too big to keep it, it doesn’t fold up very small, so I can’t keep it in my handbag. I could, I should really put it back in the car, to be honest, after I’ve unpacked my shopping each time, probably.
Interviewer: But it’s a case of training yourself.
Participant: Yes, it is.
Interviewer: So you, you know, you do take your own single use, sort of bags, shopping with you quite a few times, it sounds like?
Participant: Yes, I did, well I’ve got them in my bag at the moment, but I have to say probably eight times out of ten I do buy bags, but I mentioned in the diary that my mother in law’s sister volunteers at a food bank, and my mother in law always buys bags, because they use them at the food bank for putting the food in to give to families, so that salves my conscience slightly when I pay 10p. I always, if I’m doing my big shop and I need bags, I always get bags for life, and I do always pass them on to her, so I feel well, negative on the one hand, but at least I’m doing some good with them on the other.
Interviewer: So you get to recycle them and you get to use them for that.
Participant: Yes, and I mean, they do need them as well, and they are the type of bags that they need, so that’s what I do with the bags for life.
Interviewer: So in your opinion would you say it’s important for supermarkets to keep having single use plastic bags?
Participant: I think they could probably, if the bags for life are deemed more, I don’t know, are they deemed more environmentally friendly? It depends, do people keep using them? Are they better for the environment than the single use ones? I don’t know, if they are, then I think you could get rid of the single use ones. I don’t know. Because I think people would either just carry things, or they’d have their own bags, or worst case scenario they’d pay another 5p and get a bag for life. If it’s environmentally better then I’d say yes, scrap them. Is it? I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think if they did get rid of them, it would change your behaviour as well?
Participant: No, I don’t think, well, the only thing that would change my behaviour is I need to retrain myself. I don’t think that, because I don’t do a lot of top up shops, so I probably buy maybe three of those bags a week. I would have to retrain myself. I’d either just carry the stuff or I’d pay 10p for a bag and think, “Well I’m passing it onto the food bank anyway,” so.
Interviewer: Also a slightly odd question, do you remember the point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: I don’t know when they were, well my mother started shopping in the supermarkets probably in the, sort of, late 60s, but my mother always took shopping bags with her, so I could possibly say, sort of, around 1970, something like that. Possibly earlier. Maybe ’69, ’70. I know I started secondary school then, and we had our own bags for everything. I don’t recall wrapping things up in plastic bags very much then, so it was probably late, probably around about 1970.
Interviewer: Lovely, thank you. Okay, so we’re going to talk a little bit now about the plastic bag charge.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: How much it is, do you mean? 5p.
Interviewer: Or what do you know about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well, I know Wales brought it in, and England are bringing it in this year, is it?
Interviewer: Next week.
Participant: Is it next year?
Interviewer: Next week.
Participant: Next week, right, yes. Oh right, that’s alright, I’m going up there this week so I’ll grab a handful. I know it was brought in to try and limit the use because of the, sort of, huge quantities that were ending up in waste and were also, sort of, you know, detrimental to the environment. I presume from waste, I don’t know whether it’s from a production point of view, as well.
Interviewer: But generally to reduce some sort of waste?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: But generally to reduce waste, you think, the intention behind the charge was?
Participant: To reduce waste in production and also, sort of, in, you know, an end product, all these sort of extra carrier bags, and it has massively cut it, I think, hasn’t it? I think I read somewhere the other day that the usage had cut massively. Certainly when I go round the supermarkets here and I see people with bags that I think, at home, on Merseyside I would never see those sort of people bringing their own bags to the supermarket.
Interviewer: Those sorts of people?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Those sorts of people?
Participant: Yes, I think sometimes, you know, sort of, young, I don’t know, young couples and men on their own, that I think at home I don’t think I’d see a lot of, sort of, maybe single men coming into the supermarket and they’ve been mindful enough, is that very sexist? Sorry, I…
Interviewer: Not at all.
Participant: I’m old, I’m not very politically correct sometimes.
Interviewer: Please, we’re after the truth and honest opinions.
Participant: Yes, I see, sort of, quite young, I don’t know how to phrase it without it sounding a class thing either.
Interviewer: Please do say whatever is on your mind. Would you say people of a lower socioeconomic status?
Participant: Probably, that’s a good way to phrase it. Then I’d also, you know, I also see, sort of, single men here and then they come in and they’re unfolding a carrier bag, and I think, I don’t think I’d see that at home, I don’t think, you know, I would tend to associate at home, I’ll turn it round the other way. The people who are bringing their own bags to the supermarket at home I would tend to expect would be, sort of, middle class sort of, people with, sort of, more time on their hands. So maybe people who don’t necessarily work, retired people, older people would be mindful to bring the bags. I’ve said that in a very clumsy way.
Interviewer: No, that’s absolutely fine. Do you think it’s had quite a wide impact, then, on society?
Participant: I’m quite surprised. Yes, I’m quite surprised, I think it has had quite an impact.
Interviewer: So would you say that you’re in favour of the 5p charge?
Participant: I think probably yes. Yes.
Interviewer: Even though you have to pay for your plastic bags now?
Participant: I don’t mind that, it’s nothing really, is it? It’s not a lot of money for me, over, you know, over a week or whatever.
Interviewer: How did you first hear about the plastic bag charge, do you remember?
Participant: I don’t know. Probably on the newspaper or online or something.
Interviewer: And you’ve heard about it coming into England now, as well?
Participant: Yes, I’ve been aware of it for a while.
Interviewer: So would you say that it changed your views when it came into effect?
Participant: I think so, yes. I mean, I still object to it slightly in the sense that supermarkets, yes, in the sense that if I go into a shop and I buy a pair of knickers, she folds them up, she puts the receipt on top and she passes them across to me, and I say, “I want that in a bag please,” I don’t want to walk around with a pair of knickers that I’ve just bought in my handbag. Or if I buy, you know, a dress or a jumper or something, it’s just, you know, it can be passed across to you. So I sort of resent it slightly in terms of goods that need some protection, I think you shouldn’t have to pay 5p for that. It needs to go in a bag, it’s not pre-packaged. So I sort of resent it a little bit in that sense, because I don’t think, I wouldn’t, you might not, I wouldn’t just put, if I bought a nice blouse or something, I wouldn’t just put it in my, you know, woven bag for life type bag. I would want it protected, and I might not know I’m going to buy it, so I might not keep a collection of very clean plastic bags in my handbag, so I do sort of resent it in that sense, I feel it’s silly and it doesn’t make sense.
Interviewer: So for things like food shopping and supermarkets, that could apply, but clothes shopping not so much.
Participant: Yes, that’s acceptable, I think. I think it’s things that are entitled to have some protection. You might have paid a lot of money for them, as well, and you know, the other contradiction that annoys me slightly is the fact that you can, is the fact that supermarkets are allowed to pre-package so much, and there doesn’t appear to be any sort of levy on that, and much of what supermarkets pre-package, they do purely for their own purposes so that they can drape, you know, a little line of ten cherry tomatoes in a tray with a plastic bag and sell it for £3, whereas they know if they just put it on display, you know, nobody’s going to pick that up and pay £3 for it. So I get quite, I’m quite annoyed about that.
Interviewer: About the use of plastic when wrapping foods?
Participant: No, the way the supermarkets are allowed to get away with that, because basically they’re using extra packaging that in my opinion is only merited, it only benefits them, it enables them to package food in such a way that they can maximise their profits on it, and they do that massively, and yet if I buy an item and it needs a plastic bag to protect it in order for me to get it home, I would have to pay that. Maybe there should be some levy on supermarkets as well, who are using excess packaging on their goods. Really, there’s no reason why we have to buy apples with all that extra packaging, but the supermarkets, there seems to be no restraint on the supermarkets, nothing that is stopping the supermarkets from doing that.
Interviewer: Well funnily enough, that was going to lead to a question I was going to ask, we’ve been asking people, would you, with the effort to reduce waste, do you think there should be extra charges on minimising products and the wrapping that they use for them?
Participant: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: You would be in favour of that, then?
Participant: Yes. Yes. Extra charges for whom, for…
Interviewer: If there was something like a 5p charge to people on excessive plastic, or individually wrapped vegetables?
Participant: To the customer?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Why should the customer pay it? Because the supermarket is doing it to maximise their profits. They so are, because it’s all about presentation and it’s all about, sort of, perceived value of the goods, and they, you know, you can look at, you can see the same goods loose and you can see it pre-packaged. Why are they bothering to pre-package it? Because they can charge more for the, so I think that the levy should be on the supermarkets, forcing them to reduce the amount of packaging they use, not on the customer. I mean, it might be self-fulfilling. It might be that the customer then thinks, “Oh well I’m not paying an extra 5p for that,” so I think it should be the other way around. It should be discouraging the supermarkets from using excess packaging in the first place.
Interviewer: Yes, and going back to the 5p charge, where do you believe the money goes to from the 5p for bags?
Participant: Oh, I think it goes to the Treasury. I think it’s like a tax, is it? I don’t know.
Interviewer: Some sort of government collection of the tax?
Participant: I think so. Is it?
Interviewer: It’s supposed to be donated to charities.
Participant: Is it really? Oh, right.
Interviewer: But it’s not something that you’ve thought…
Participant: No, I’d feel better about using bags if I knew it went to charity, actually. I’d probably use them all the time.
Interviewer: Is it like with the food bank?
Participant: Yes, exactly, it salves my conscience.
Interviewer: Does it make you think about your behaviour? When the charge came in, did you think that you would bring more bags?
Participant: When I moved down here, yes, it did, and I did, sort of, start being mindful about it, but I don’t know, I’m just not, my brain hasn’t been trained in that way. I really need to, you know, I need to put Post-its in the kitchen and Post-its in the car, “Have you got your bags?” and whatever, it’s just it’s not, sort of, ingrained behaviour yet.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge? Do you think it will still be effective?
Participant: I think so, yes. I think people, you know, I think people’s behaviours probably, as time goes by, continue to be modified for the good. I think so, yes. I don’t think people will just think, I think, you know, once they’ve got into those patterns of behaviour they’ll probably stick with them. That’s how we always used to shop, years ago, so I mean…
Interviewer: How about other charges, such as introducing a higher cost on, say, fuel duties for environmental causes?
Participant: No, I don’t [pauses], no I wouldn’t be in favour of that.
Interviewer: You wouldn’t?
Participant: No. I don’t think anybody wants to pay more for fuel, do they? I mean, you know, it impacts onto so many different things. On, you know, people who drive a lot of miles for work, it impacts on prices of goods. I’m not in favour of it.
Interviewer: Because of the wider implications, as well?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay. Moving swiftly on, I’m afraid, there’s a lot to cover.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Looking now at environmental behaviours that you may or may not do around the house. So do you save water at home? I think you mentioned before.
Participant: Save water? I mean, do I try and economise, do I try and, I use on the washing machine sometimes, sort of, an eco-time. I don’t know whether that saves water. I think it saves times. I do use a short wash, a very short wash, when appropriate, but you know, I will tailor what I need to use to what I’ve got to wash. So I’m not terribly mindful about saving water, but then I’m not extravagant, either. We shower rather than take a bath, most of the time. I don’t save water in a water butt in the garden, and we have watered the garden this summer, but really only our vegetables and greenhouse, and our pots of flowers. I would never water the grass or anything like that.
Interviewer: You have a greenhouse and a lot of vegetables that you grow there, as well?
Participant: We haven’t got loads. We’re sort of happy amateurs, but we’ve grown quite a bit of, we’ve grown all of our tomatoes, well, most of our tomatoes this summer, and chilli peppers, cucumbers, beans. We really only started late this summer, so we’ve just, my partner’s just built a big raised bed, so we’re hoping to do a lot more next summer.
Interviewer: Lovely, and how about saving energy at home, such as electricity and gas?
Participant: We’re sort of on target with what our estimate was. We changed providers, sort of, earlier in the year, and I sort of, I do read the meter. Obviously this has been the, sort of, quarter, half year when we’re using less.
Interviewer: What made you change providers, can I ask?
Participant: Cost, I think, we got a better deal. Well, I usually am the one that looks into all this, and my partner hadn’t changed from when he bought the house. [Coughs] excuse me.
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: I’m sure he could get a better deal, which we did, so we changed earlier in the year. Yes, I mean, I turn lights off, we use lamps with, sort of, a lower bulbs in the evening. We’ve got a dimmer switch. I don’t know whether that saves electricity or not, but we have the light dimmed in the evening, and I do turn lights off, but not 100%. I like to feel that I’m living in my whole house, as well, and so you know, when I go up in the evening for my shower, I put the lamp on in the bedroom, and then I’ll go down and leave that on, and then we’ll go to bed an hour later and the room, you know, so I’m not obsessive about it. We’re comfortably off. I don’t like to waste money, but you know, we don’t have to watch every penny, sort of thing, and I think our bills are quite moderate, really. I don’t have the heating on during the day in the winter, usually I’m out and about or I’m busy anyway, and we tend to use it manually, but that’s because we haven’t really got to grips with the new timer that we’ve got. We had a new boiler installed earlier in the year, so that’s pretty, that should reduce our bills as well, because we had a very old boiler before.
Interviewer: Why was that, you chose to upgrade that for what reasons?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Did it break down, the old boiler?
Participant: It did, yes, yes. I mean, it was really, really old, and we were just, sort of, my partner bought the house last June, it was a very, very old boiler, but it was absolutely fine so we just thought we’ll carry on with it until we’re ready, because we were doing other jobs as well, and then it did break down and we thought we might as well replace it now, there was no point in getting it repaired. Yes, so we’ve got a new, modern boiler. So I think we should notice quite a big difference with that this winter.
Interviewer: Yes, and how about reusing things at home?
Participant: Reusing things? I think I’m quite good. I don’t waste. I don’t waste things, I’m not a great buyer now. I’ve come, I’m in my late 50s, and I’ve sort of pared things down, so we have in our house what we use and what we like. I do go to charity shops, I will buy things in charity shops, I will donate stuff to charity shops. I don’t really, I have used Freecycle and Freegle, I used them a lot when I lived in The Wirral. I don’t find them as easy to use down here, but I have put stuff on there, and we put, I mean, it’s amazing what people will come and take, really. So we took some fencing down and I just put it on there, that there was all this fence wood, and I don’t know what they used it for, because I don’t think you’re supposed to burn it, but somebody came and took it. So any kind of odd things that we’ve got, I usually will try them on there first.
Interviewer: What makes you put them on Freecycle?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: What makes you put them on Freecycle?
Participant: I just don’t like waste, and also it saves me taking them to the tip, as well, so you know, it saves me an hour’s journey, or loading my car up and taking it down there, if somebody will just come and pick it up if they want it. We’ve just taken, we’re getting rid of our en-suite, we’ve just taken the small toilet and wash basin out, I’m taking that up to my daughter’s this week, she’s going to install it in their outside, they’ve got an outside loo, and I sort of, I quite like, my partner’s not quite so keen, but I quite like upcycling furniture and things, so if I find a little table or whatever, I’ll, you know, paint it up and use it. So we’re not sort of big consumers of stuff, if you like, really. I tend to try and, what we buy we keep, and we’re not impulse buyers, and we’re not, we don’t feel like we’ve got to have, you know, the next best thing sort of thing. If we change our phones, we’ll either, well, I sort of sold mine back to them, which I presume it’s going to be reused. My partner passed his phone onto his daughter, because hers had broken.
Interviewer: Yes, so they get reused.
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: How about household recycling?
Participant: What, in terms of…
Interviewer: Plastics and tins.
Participant: Yes, I mean, I’m fairly diligent. I’ve got the blue recycling bag because I find that better to use than the green boxes that they provide, so yes, I do that pretty diligently. We’ve got an old fashioned bin with a black bag in it, but I find most of ours goes in the blue bag, to be honest. I recycle the food waste, which is mostly sort of veg peelings and stuff, and we use the green recycling service, as well.
Interviewer: Yes, and how about eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: No, I never use those. Never, no.
Interviewer: Are you not a fan?
Participant: I’ve never used them. I perceive them as more expensive, and possibly I perceive them as not as effective, but I don’t know because I never use them.
Interviewer: But it’s the cost that would keep you away?
Participant: I haven’t even looked at the cost. It’s just my perception. They’re not really something I’ve ever really thought about.
Interviewer: How about organic foods? Do you look into those?
Participant: No, I don’t, to be honest, on a cost basis. Yes, I could afford them, but I suppose I try to be an economical shopper. I, sort of, peel my veg mostly, so I tend to think that can get rid of a lot of the pesticides that are in it. I’ll only pick up something organic if it’s, you know, it’s got a yellow sticker on and it’s sort of reduced because it’s coming close to its end date or something, but I don’t specifically go out to look for organic products.
Interviewer: Lastly, are there any environmental organisations or charities that you support?
Participant: I am a friend of Walton Hall Park, which is a part of my childhood park, and that’s up in Liverpool, and they’re campaigning at the moment to try and stop the park being developed, but I’m a sort of support from a distance. Moral support, and I did send them a donation as well, but there’s not much I can do from up here. Off the top of my head, I can’t particularly think of anything else.
Interviewer: No, that’s absolutely fine. So thinking in general about yourself, would you say that you are concerned about the environment?
Participant: Probably in quite a close to home way, really, if I’m honest.
Interviewer: Close to home?
Participant: In terms of, probably I’m not as concerned as I should be about the bigger picture. I’m probably more concerned about what’s going on around me and my family, and things that sort of impact on my life, if I’m honest.
Interviewer: No, that’s absolutely fine, but you do, you say…
Participant: Well I’ve got friends who, I can see from things they put on Facebook, they’re far more environmentally aware and concerned than I am, and so I think probably on a scale I’m fairly, probably, low down in terms of my environmental concerns.
Interviewer: So for you, your other priorities would be, say, your family and your local, and that sort of thing?
Participant: Yes, I think so. I’m aware of the bigger things. I suppose they’re easier just, you’ve got, they’re things that you’ve actively got to, kind of, look into, and I’m not saying that I don’t care. I’m just saying that I haven’t taken my interests and enthusiasm those steps further to, sort of, actively find out more and involve myself.
Interviewer: So you wouldn’t say that the environment is a, sort of, big part of your identity then?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Thinking about other, sort of, issues in the world, such as health or economic or social issues, how would you rank environmental issues in those?
Participant: I probably would rank them highly. Probably as highly, really, I would think, I suppose. My feeling is it’s for somebody else to do something about it, not me.
Interviewer: Yes. Because it’s such a wide problem?
Participant: Yes, and I think sometimes I feel things are, sort of, it’s a drop in the ocean, and yet I know all those drops do contribute to, you know, to have an impact. I think they’re easy things just to, sort of, turn your back on, and you know, sometimes I think, oh people harp on, I think, “Well I drive a really small, little, economical car that doesn’t impact as much on the environment as some of these great big beasts that I see,” so I suppose I can talk myself out, I can say I’m economical, I don’t throw, my personal behaviours are not wasteful, and so I suppose I can sort of console myself in that way, and think that, you know, that there are people that are more active in this, well they can get on with it. I suppose I’m quite, kind of, inward looking really, probably.
Interviewer: And you can say, you know, you’ve got the behaviours that you do, so you feel like you are doing…
Participant: Yes, probably, apart from the bags, but then, but yes, mostly, I think, I know there are things that I could change, but I don’t think I live extravagantly. I don’t think I make, I’m not a massive consumer. I don’t know, I’m sort of trying to justify it to myself.
Interviewer: Is there, because you seem, sorry, just to phrase this right. So you think that there are behaviours that you think you could do, but you don’t choose to do them because, or you don’t…
Participant: Possibly, yes, yes. But then I would have to be, you know, changing my washing products, that is something I would have to proactively look into, and then I would have to think what, how much of an impact is that going to make, and you know, we live near [?? 47.12] and although I live in a village, well, I don’t know if it’s [?? 47.16] or the cement works, sorry to deviate here. Although I live in a village, and it’s quite a rural environment, I’m shocked by the amount of grit that, you know, the amount of deposits that are on my window ledges every day. It reminds me sometimes of when I lived in Liverpool, years ago, before it became a smoke free zone, and I look sometimes and see the amount of crap that’s pumped out of their chimney, and then I think, “Well while that’s all going on,” and the power station there is supposed to be one of the dirtiest power stations in the country, and I think, “Well all that’s going on and somebody wants me to pay an extra £1 to buy eco washing up liquid.”
Interviewer: So in the face of that power plant…
Participant: So I suppose I feel a little bit like that sometimes, as well.
Interviewer: Do you feel like if there was an opportunity for you to have more of an impact on the environment that you would take it?
Participant: In what way?
Interviewer: Do you wish that there was a behaviour or something that you could do that was more effective for the environment, say?
Participant: I don’t know, really. I think if I were to do anything it would be more campaigning or supporting something, and it would probably, like, my local park, stopping it getting developed or something like that. I think I would be most likely to be involved in something like that, if it was the right thing for, you know, if it was something that I thought…
Interviewer: And that would be a way to make a bigger change?
Participant: Probably, yes. I suppose, yes. With other people, as well, working, yes. I think if I were to do something, it would be along those lines. For instance, if I lived now where I used to live, I would probably be very, much more involved and hands on and that with meetings and campaigns and they’re going out and they’re actually doing work in the park to improve it, and they’re getting grants to do planting as well as, sort of, fighting the council and whatever, and I would, if I lived up there I think I would be very involved in that, because that is my kind of thing.
Interviewer: Okay, excellent. Thank you very much. How much, thinking about the environment still, how much would you say you are aware of environmental issues?
Participant: Moderately. I mean, basically, I don’t seek out information. Whatever I am, sort of, seeing on the news or reading in the paper, or whatever’s happening locally if I ever see something in the local paper.
Interviewer: But it’s something that you see but it’s not something that you seek out?
Participant: If I saw a, you know, a sort of big article about something in the Telegraph or the Guardian, I don’t think I would read it in full.
Interviewer: Okay, excellent. Last, sort of, set of questions, and you touched upon this with the dust, but what would you say are the main problems in your local neighbourhood?
Participant: I’m, sort of, I’m quite mindful about what’s being spewed out just down the road from me. I don’t know whether the airport has any impact either. I mean, I haven’t lived here, sort of, that long, but I do, you know, I do feel there’s, sort of, stuff landing on my window ledges that I wouldn’t have expected to in this environment, but otherwise, I mean, we live a stone’s throw from the airport. It doesn’t really bother us to live a stone’s throw from the airport. We have a lot of holidays, we go abroad quite a lot. So the fact that the airport’s there is quite a pleasant reminder to us that we’ll be going away in two months’ time, and we don’t curtail our flying for environmental reasons. If we want to go on holiday, we’re going to go. So I don’t know, apart from that down the road, I don’t really see that many here, to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s excellent, thank you very much. You mentioned, quickly then, about flying. Do you feel that there is pressure for you to cut down on flights?
Participant: I don’t feel pressure. I mean, I have read that, you know, that is one of the ways that we can help improve the environment, by reducing the number of times that you fly, but that’s not something we do. I don’t feel pressured to, no.
Interviewer: Okay, lovely, well thank you very much.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Are there any points that you’d like to clarify, or anything you’d like to add, any detail?
Participant: I don’t think so, really.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, lovely, thank you. Before I let you go, there are just a couple of demographic questions, if I can run through them quickly with you.
Participant: Right, yes.
Interviewer: So your age band, I think you mentioned the late 50s?
Participant: I’m 57.
Interviewer: Right, and I’m assuming you’re female?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: You have to ask these days. Can you tell me your highest level of educational qualification?
Participant: Yes, I’ve got an ordinary degree.
Interviewer: Ordinary degree, lovely. And you’re self-employed.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And is that full time?
Participant: No, it’s part time, really.
Interviewer: Part time. I suppose you don’t really have a job title then, I’m assuming?
Participant: Well I do a couple of things, really. I’ve got a home help business, if you like, so I do that probably about 12 hours a week, and then I’m a retail auditor, which is probably another, well, that varies very much. 15 hours, maybe.
Interviewer: My brother used to do that.
Participant: Oh did he?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: That’s great. I mean, when I moved down here I wanted flexibility, and I can sort my own diary out now, it’s great, so I can still go on holiday and go and see my daughter and whatever, and then I try and jump on as many of these as I can, as well.
Interviewer: Well we appreciate that. So it’s you and your partner living in the house?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Those are the only two?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: No children living with you at the moment?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: At a rough estimate, could you give some indication of household income, please?
Participant: Well, £50,000 plus.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is it one or two cars?
Participant: We’ve got two cars.
Interviewer: Two cars. Lovely stuff. Right, well that’s the details that we need. Thank you very much.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So thank you again, that’s a huge help. We love to, you know, really great information there, enjoyed that talk.
Participant: Right, okay.
Interviewer: So what’s going to happen now is that the second phase will be occurring in November, and the diaries will be from the 13th until the 22nd.
Participant: Yes, I’ve got that in my diary now anyway. So we’ll get an email again, presumably, just prior to it?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: To get going. I think I have got that down, I’m sure I have. Yes. 13th to 22nd, yes, and then a follow up, I think again on the, I think I’ve got that in, as well.
Interviewer: Yes, between the 22nd and 30th.
Participant: Yes, that’s fine. I think I’ve got it on the 23rd, actually, at the moment. Okay, no, that’s great, no, I’ve enjoyed it. I look forward to the next phase.
Interviewer: Excellent.
Participant: Okay, nice to speak to you, good luck with things.
Interviewer: Thank you very much.
Participant: Cheers, bye.