Interviewer: Yeah, so thanks for taking part, we just have one hour to speak about your experiences of the diary study...
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: ...and then just to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary.
Participant: Yeah, okay.
Interviewer: There are no good or bad answers, we’re just interested in people’s honest opinions.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So do you have any questions before we sort of start?
Participant: No, fire away!
Interviewer: Okay. So could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: I didn’t find it too bad actually. I kind of set an alarm every evening to remind myself to do it, obviously I’d get the text message as well which was really helpful. It would take, I mean it differed, some nights, if I hadn’t bought anything that day, it was pretty quick and easy to fill in, days where I’d bought stuff and had receipts, obviously it would take a bit longer but it never took me anything longer than half an hour at the most.
Interviewer: So do you think it was quite easy?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah, no problem.
Interviewer: And was there anything quite tedious to write down?
Participant: Um, not particularly, no, I didn’t... I mean I do quite a lot of stuff like that at work to be honest, form filling and questionnaire type things so I didn’t find it particularly difficult and there were no parts of it that were particularly hard or anything really.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you?
Participant: Um, it’s quite interesting when you’re actually logging down how much you’re kind of consuming and getting rid of every day, it kind of brings it home a bit more but I was quite surprised how little I actually throw away. And I don’t recycle either, which every time I was filling the form in just made me feel bad about it so I’m going to start recycling I think! It made me feel really guilty! [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay, is there any reason why you don’t recycle?
Participant: Yeah, I live in an apartment and to have like three different recycling things would mean it took up loads... This is my excuse anyway, it would take up loads of space and it would just be like stuff hanging around for ages and I’m a bit of a clean freak, I like things like neat and tidy and just to have like three bags of like one of organic waste and one of... Do you know what I mean, it would just be a bit of a nightmare, but I’m going to try and start doing it because the bin store is just downstairs in the lift so it’s not like I’ve got to have it literally hanging around in my apartment all the time so I just need to be a bit more disciplined about I think.
Interviewer: So could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Okay, well I generally do a monthly big food shop, it’s usually around pay day because that’s just when I go and I go over to Asda which is two minutes away from where I live, I take the car because it’s a monthly shop, I have loads of bags and stuff. Sometimes I take my own bags but I’ll be honest, most of the time I don’t and that’s just me being forgetful. So because it’s monthly, before I go over, I have a look through each cupboard, see what I’m running low of, have a look in the bathroom see what I need to buy in there and then I’ll make myself a list, write it down on paper, take a pen with me and then as I’m going round the shop I’ll cross things off and doing it monthly means I can kind of bulk buy some stuff which brings the price down as well so then I just spend the rest of the month just topping up.
Interviewer: So topping up as in going to shops to get things like milk and bread or whatever?
Participant: Yeah, a bit of milk, bit of bread, some wine or something, you know, cheese, stuff like that.
Interviewer: What shops do you go to when you do your top-ups?
Participant: I go, because I live down the Bay I’ve got literally Morrisons, Asda and Aldi on my doorstep, the three of them are just like over the road so I tend to go to Asda just out of habit and it’s cheaper than Morrisons, the selection’s more than Aldi’s and I just find it a better shopping experience. Yeah.
Interviewer: And when you’re sort of deciding what food you want to buy, what is more or less important.
Participant: More important to me is stuff that will keep so things like pasta, rice, tinned stuff, stuff I know that I’m not going to throw out if it goes off, because I live in an apartment by myself if I’m buying things like bread and milk it goes off, because I don’t use it, you know, every day and stuff it goes off pretty quick so I try and... I mean I hate throwing food out, it really does my head in, so I try and buy stuff that keeps for a while, I buy lots of veg and I buy frozen veg as well, peas, broccoli, that type of thing because even though it’s frozen it’s still really healthy and I know I can just put my hand in a bag in the freezer, pull out loads of broccoli and I’ve got veg ready to go.
Interviewer: So shelf life then is pretty important?
Participant: Yeah. Yeah, definitely shelf life, yeah.
Interviewer: And what’s not important?
Participant: Things like... Hm, stuff that’s going to go off within a few days so kind of pastries, take type stuff I don’t really bother with, I don’t buy tea or coffee, I don’t drink tea or coffee at all. I don’t buy bottled water, I fill an old bottle up with tap water and put it in the fridge so I’ve always got chilled water, so I’m kind of recycling that a bit. And fruit, I don’t buy much fruit because A I don’t eat much fruit and it just goes off really quickly.
Interviewer: Okay. And you said it does your head in throwing away food.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Can you like elaborate on that a little bit?
Participant: Well there’s millions of people in the world who haven’t got any food and it makes me feel bad throwing food away, perfectly, I mean, you know, it was edible and the only reason I’m throwing it away is because I didn’t plan ahead enough with perhaps meals or things like that and you know, it’s gone off in the fridge and I’ve thrown it away and the idea of throwing food away in today’s kind of age when so many people don’t have it, it doesn’t make me feel good so it’s kind of a conscientious thing really.
Interviewer: And when you do your top-up shops do you walk to those stores or do you drive?
Participant: I usually... Well I either go over on my bike or I’ll walk, it’s not far that at all. I do drive occasionally, what I’ll sometimes do is... I cycle to work about 50% of the time, 50% of the time I drive so on my way back from work, whether I’m either on the bike or the car I kind of stop in Asda on the way home because what it means is that I’m not coming home and thinking, oh no, I’ve still got to go out and I can just do it on the way home and when I get home I don’t have to go anywhere, it’s done.
Interviewer: So you plan to go shopping by yourself then?
Participant: Yeah, don’t make it sound so sad! [Laughs] Oh dude!
Interviewer: That’s not sad! It’s not sad at all, I go shopping by myself!
Participant: Ah! [Laughs] Do you live in Cardiff then?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Oh right, so it’s Cardiff Uni that are doing this study isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Right, I see. I wasn’t sure, when you asked me what country I was from I was like, what!
Interviewer: Yeah, well I didn’t have it like noted down in front of me, I can’t find it so I just...
Participant: I didn’t get like an ID number type thing emailed to me so I’ve just been putting my name down on the email thing.
Interviewer: Oh, that’ll probably be why I don’t have one then.
Participant: Ah, okay.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s fine.  So yeah, so how much of your food does go to waste every week then?
Participant: If I buy a loaf of bread on a Monday, by Friday I’m probably... And I buy smaller loaves of bread because I’m on my own! And I probably like throw most of that away. I don’t make sandwiches for lunch at the moment because, I don’t know, I just can’t... In the morning I’m like, waahhh, got to get to work! So I don’t... Maybe I’ll have a bit of toast or something and that’s it, maybe in a week I’ll have three or four bits of toast and that’s it so I’m lobbing loads of bread away all the time, so I’ve actually kind of stopped buying it and apparently bread is really evil anyway so I’ve just been buying like brown seeded bread because it’s supposed to be more healthier but I’m still throwing it away so. If you could literally buy bread at two slices at a time I would do that, that’s how little I use.
Interviewer: So is it just the bread or do you have lots of waste or...?
Participant: Milk as well. Like the other day I was really thirsty, I opened the fridge, grabbed the milk, just drank it out the bottle and as I was swallowing it I realised it had gone off.
Interviewer: Oh!
Participant: And I was just gipping, like [imitates being sick] and I’m like, not again! So like every week I probably... I don’t throw as much milk away as I do bread buy maybe once a month, twice a month I have to throw a pint or two of milk away.
Interviewer: So do you think you create a lot of food waste, a sort of medium amount, not very much?
Participant: Oh, compared to what I’ve seen other people throw away it’s minimal. I mean I go round to some people’s houses and they’re literally just clearing out cupboards once a week throwing stuff away, it’s just crazy. But these are the kind of people who spend like two hundred quid a week on food and I don’t spend anywhere near that. I can spend like eighty pounds a month on food and eat really healthy, three meals a day, you know.
Interviewer: So could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear ‘supermarket plastic bag’?
Participant: Um, five words?
Interviewer: Uh huh.
Participant: Change because it’s got to change, we can’t be doing this anymore. Impact because the impact, I mean I’ve travelled the world a lot and I just go to some countries where there’s just plastic bags everywhere. So change, impact. Revenue because these shops should, you know, if they charged a quid for every plastic bag I guarantee the amount of plastic bags being thrown away would drop by 90% overnight. So what words was that again?
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: What words, sorry, say again, I’ve given three haven’t I?
Interviewer: Impact. Change.
Participant: Revenue.
Interviewer: Revenue.
Participant: Um, just waste, it’s a waste. And environment because it has a massive environmental impact.
Interviewer: And do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Yeah, I was living in the Middle East in a country called Abu Dhabi and there was like one supermarket in the whole country and we used to go there and I remember that’s the first time I saw shopping being put in these really thin white plastic bags.
Interviewer: Oh wow!
Participant: Yeah, weird!
Interviewer: Okay, anything else to add to that?
Participant: No. Well, you know, just I was aware then that these things were just being handed out hand over fist for... Because before that it used to be that you had all your shopping and you could pick up like an old cardboard box at the till and you’d put all your shopping in an old cardboard box and carry it home. But then I remember that suddenly there were these plastic bags everywhere, I remember it being quite a thing, I think my mum might have said something about it at the time. But like in America everyone, you know, you see on Friends and all of that, everyone’s got these paper bags, why don’t we have that over here? So yeah, that’s the first time I remember.
Interviewer: And what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping then?
Participant: Those Asda ones but now they... The ones in Asda are quite thick, they’re almost like bag for life thickness, they’re 5p but in Morrisons they’re a lot thinner.
Interviewer: Right, but it’s not actually the bags for life then is it?
Participant: No, it’s not. No, the bags for life in Asda are almost like made of hessian, they’re really thick, but the normal 5p bags are like really really thick and I’m thinking that’s a lot of bag for 5p! Morrisons you just get like this wafer thin plastic bag!
Interviewer: Okay. So the single-use plastic bags then?
Participant: Yeah, that’s all I use and I’ve got a cupboard full of them at home here.
Interviewer: But do you buy them in the store as you go or do you take with them you?
Participant: Oh, don’t judge me but I buy them in the store.
Interviewer: Okay, I’m...
Participant: But when I’ve got loads I take them into work and hand them out like Smarties! People think I’m weird, they call me the ‘bag man’! I’m like, dude, I’m just trying to help you out!
Interviewer: What? So why do you hand them out at work?
Participant: Because... Well people at work are always going, oh I’ve got to go like to the court or I’ve got to go down here, down there, I need to take my stuff and I’m like, oh I’ve got a bag here if you want it and so I do that because...
Interviewer: So do you take a big bundle of them with you to work?
Participant: Well like... It sounds weird! I used to like take my packed lunches in a bag, eat my packed lunch, put the bag by my desk and then after like a few months I thought, oh my God, I’ve got all these plastic bags! So I just put them in the office and people just help themselves. But they don’t call me the ‘bag man’ anymore because it was just a bit weird.
Interviewer: Okay! So you buy them instore.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what’s good and what is not good about these bags?
Participant: The good thing is they’re really durable, like they’re really hardy and robust, they last for ages and the bad thing is that they’re quite thick and that’s a lot of plastic involved for making one bag, you know.
Interviewer: Yeah. So why do you buy these rather than bags for life or rather than taking your own bag?
Participant: Um, because I’m lazy, I’m forgetful and I just... It’s about forward planning isn’t it and if I’m on my way from work to the shop and then going home I don’t think about taking a load of plastic bags with me in the car in the morning to do my shopping on the way back from work. I should keep a load in the car, that’s what I keep telling myself, just put a load in the boot of the car and I’ve always got them there but I’ve been telling myself to do that for years and I still haven’t got round to doing it.
Interviewer: So why not the bags for life, why do you like the other ones?
Participant: Um, because the bags for life, they just take, you know... I don’t know, I think I’ve got a couple here somewhere but I just don’t, I don’t know, it’s a difficult one. The other ones... What I sometimes do is if I’ve taken my bins out, instead of getting a whole new bin bag out, black bin liner, I’ll just get one of those Asda bags and start using that as a bin and then when that gets a little bit full I’ll put that in the bin bag and then start using the bin bag so I kind of use them as a bit of a rubbish bag as well, which I wouldn’t do with a bag for life.
Interviewer: Okay, why wouldn’t you do that with a bag for life?
Participant: Because it’s for life man, you can’t throw it away! Because I don’t even know how much they are, aren’t they like a quid or something?
Interviewer: I think they’re only like 10p!
Participant: Are they?
Interviewer: I’m not sure, not the hessian ones, like the plastic ones I think are not...
Participant: Oh right! Well I don’t know, they only do two in Asda, the hessian ones and the other ones which are... I thought they were 5p, maybe they’re 10. No, they’re 5, they’re definitely 5p.
Interviewer: So they’re the same price as the ones that you’re buying?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: No, no, the... Sorry, the bags for life are more expensive, I thought they were a lot more expensive. The ones I get are 5p but they’re a lot thicker than the thinner bags for 5p you’d get in any other shop.
Interviewer: Okay. So basically you don’t know, price I guess.
Participant: I’m not sure how much a bag for life is, no, because I’ve never ever bought one.
Interviewer: So in your opinion then, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it’s important in the sense of it being convenient and a service that supermarkets should provide, you know, you’re buying all their stuff they need to give you the provisions to take that home but I think there needs to be some sort of policy in place whereby you’re either rewarded for bringing your own bags in or they up the price of the cost of the bags or they reduce the ease at which you can get them. I know in Morrisons when you go through the self-service checkout there’s no obvious place to get them, you have to kind of go and ask somebody for them, which is quite interesting.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s good or bad?
Participant: Well I think it’s good, I mean the less plastic bags that end up in landfill and in the oceans and in the rivers is massively important, you know, and everyone needs to make a small change in their kind of behaviour in order to facilitate that but I think a lot of the onus also lies with the supermarkets and I think they could do a lot to kind of help change people’s kind of behaviour and the way they buy bags, use bags and recycle bags. And I know Asda now, if you take a normal plastic bag back to Asda, the 5p ones and it’s ripped, they give you another one for free!
Interviewer: Oh right, okay. That’s just the normal single-use ones then?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: I knew they did that with bags for life.
Participant: Yeah, they do it with the normal plastic ones now.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: I didn’t know that until the other day and the woman said, I was like, oh right, okay. I was like I don’t even bring my bags here anyway, now you’ve made me feel even worse!
Interviewer: So if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how would you find that?
Participant: Well it wouldn’t be a problem for me because I’d pretty much adjust really quickly, I’d take my rucksack, I’d take bags I’ve got lying around here, I’d do whatever I had to do to get my shopping home. You’d have to wouldn’t you? You’d have to have bags in the car and stuff like that.
Interviewer: So you mentioned that you’re using bags as sort of bin liners.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever use them... Oh, and handing them out at work obviously.
Participant: Yeah, don’t tell anyone that! People are going to think I’m weird.
Interviewer: Do you have any other uses for them?
Participant: What else do I use them for? When I cycle to work I keep my kind of bike tools in a plastic bag in my rucksack, if I’m going away up into the mountains I use them to keep clothes dry. I wrap ice up in them to crush ice when I’m making cocktails, other than that, that’s about it.
Interviewer: So how many plastic bags do you think you currently have at home?
Participant: Oh my God! I’m going to look in the cupboard now! [Goes to look in cupboard] Right, I’ve got like a Tesco bag for life that I think my mum gave me, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10, I reckon I’ve probably got about 40!
Interviewer: Right, okay. And are they all the single-use ones basically?
Participant: Yeah, they are, all of them.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: So that would probably last me like six months, you know, but because they’re only 5p it’s like oh, it’s only 5p! If they were like a tenner each, I’m pretty sure I’d soon change my behaviour. [Puts bags back into cupboard]
Interviewer: Okay. Are you okay there, are you putting them all back?
Participant: Yeah, it’s okay, it’s all done! [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay. So you’re aware of the plastic bag charge then?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Living in Wales, so the 5p...
Participant: Yeah. It’s weird when I go to England and they don’t charge, it kind of doesn’t feel right because they should be really.
Interviewer: Why do you think they should be?
Participant: Because I think, even though... I mean I have taken bags to the supermarket on occasion and every little thing you can do to reduce the amount of plastic waste into the environment is brilliant and I think there are a lot of people who are probably a little bit more together about it than I am and if they introduced it into England as well it would massively reduce the amount of waste.
Interviewer: Do you remember what context, sort of like where you heard about the Welsh plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: Yeah, I think I heard it on the radio somewhere. It was years ago now wasn’t it? Was it about 5, no, 6, 7 years ago, something like that, I think I heard it on the radio and then a few people, I was living in West Wales at the time, a few people were talking about it there and people were kind of saying like which shops would charge you for which type of bags and whether like if you went to McDonalds or something, whether they’d charge you for that and whether they were going to charge you for the little bags that you put your fruit and veg in in the supermarkets, there was all this kind of talk about it at the time but it was quite a big, you know, it was a big deal. It was talked about almost as much as the smoking ban in pubs at the time, it was quite a... I think because it has a considerable kind of impact on people’s lives it kind of changes the way that they do things, you know.
Interviewer: So did you find the introduction of the charge quite surprising or not really?
Participant: Not really, no, I thought it was inevitable at some point given the amount of plastic that’s being thrown away, you know, I welcomed it really.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the charge?
Participant: I think it’s a great idea. I think they should be charging more, I really do.
Interviewer: So I was about to ask, you know, what’s sort of good about it and what’s not as good, do you think maybe the price is not as good, should it be more?
Participant: Yeah, the price needs to be higher, that’s the bad thing is they’re not charging enough for a plastic bag, not that the supermarkets should get that money, the supermarkets should make a small profit on the fact that they’re having to buy the bags in and all that kind of thing, I think there should be a tax, a higher tax on plastic bags that goes directly to environmental issues, environmental charities or government policies or projects to reduce the amount of plastic in the environment, so that’s the bad thing that they’re not charging enough. The good thing is that there’s a charge in the first place and that that charge has, from what I guess, has had some kind of impact on the amount of plastic that’s thrown away.
Interviewer: So did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England?
Participant: I’d heard rumours of it, yeah, I’m surprised it hasn’t been done years ago.
Interviewer: When and where did you hear about it?
Participant: I think I heard about it... I don’t know, maybe it was in the papers a few months ago, maybe, if I remember correctly but I don’t know when it’s being introduced, it’s kind of been discussed for a long time now and people... Because we’re living in Wales and obviously it’s a thing here, it’s always been kind of like, well why aren’t they doing it in England, you know.
Interviewer: It’s being introduced in October so...
Participant: Oh right, okay. As in now, today?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Oh right, okay.
Interviewer: I don’t know if it’s specifically today but I know it’s in October, so.
Participant: Right. Cool! That’s a good thing.
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: The main what, sorry?
Interviewer: Purposes.
Participant: It’s got to be to reduce the amount of plastic going back into the environment and to reduce landfill because I think it’s a massive percentage of landfill that is plastic bags.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s been successful in doing that?
Participant: Um, I think possibly but only given the fact that local authority recycling schemes have improved at the same time.
Interviewer: Okay, so not just solely due to the...
Participant: I don’t think it’s solely due to the fact that they’ve put a tax on plastic bags, I think it’s a dual kind of tandem thing whereby there’s more facilities available now to recycle, not just recycling plants but the local authority’s actual policy in providing people with recycling bags and bins and collections and that type of thing.
Interviewer: But do you think the charge itself has been successful in reducing plastics?
Participant: Yeah, I would hope so, yeah, I mean I don’t see as much, you know, it wasn’t that long ago, just plastic bags hanging from every tree and every hedge and I don’t see as much of that anymore. So it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Yeah. So did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in Wales affect you?
Participant: Not in a negative way, no. I mean it affected me in the sense that, you know, I’d have to kind of remember that if I was buying something I needed an extra 5p but that’s never been an issue for me, do you know what I mean.
Interviewer: Yeah. So has it changed your shopping bag use?
Participant: No! Dude, you make me feel bad! I mean, no, I mean it has but to a very minimum extent.
Interviewer: What is that?
Participant: As in maybe out of every ten times I go to the supermarket, not for a monthly shop but for a top-up, I’ll take my own bags and that’s usually when I’m cycling or walking over when I’ve actually got time to think, right, I’m going to the shop, take some bags, rather than coming back from work and stopping at the shop on the way.
Interviewer: Yeah. What about your shopping behaviour, do you think it’s changed your shopping behaviour?
Participant: No, I still buy the same things I’ve always bought in the same quantities, you know, at the same kind of frequency of shopping.
Interviewer: And do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person since the plastic bag charge was introduced?
Participant: I like to think so but not as much as some people but I’m getting there.
Interviewer: In what ways do you think?
Participant: Um, just more of a subconscious thing really about being more aware of recycling, I used to recycle before I moved to Cardiff and now I don’t and I think that’s down to the fact that I live in an apartment with a balcony, I don’t have a garden to keep the bins and yet I’ve got a bin store downstairs if I go down in the lift and I’m a lot busier now than I have been in the past and I think it’s all those factors combined.
Interviewer: And so you sort of mentioned noticing less carrier bags visibly in trees and hedges and things, have you noticed any other changes since the introduction of the charge, in your country, your local area or for yourself?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve noticed when I go round to people’s houses now, more and more people have got those things in their kitchen where once they’ve done their shopping they get their empty bags and you kind of push them in the holes so you’ve always got this thing in your kitchen where you’ve got access to recycled plastic bags and I see more and more people with those and I need to get one myself really.
Interviewer: Do you think they would fit?
Participant: I doubt it! It would have to be... It would have to be like Christmas tree sized! [Laughs] Do you recycle everything then, are you like totally right on it?
Interviewer: Me? Well I just want to say like this whole questionnaire, it’s completely...
Participant: It’s not about me it’s about you!
Interviewer: Yeah, like it’s completely neutral so you saying you don’t recycle, that’s absolutely fine, like...
Participant: Alright. Yeah, but as a person you probably think less of me! [Laughs]
Interviewer: I don’t think less of you at all!
Participant: Sorry! Okay.
Interviewer: I do try and recycle.
Participant: Oh right, just checking!
Interviewer: As a person but yeah, there’s no judgement here at all.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Honestly!
Participant: Alright.
Interviewer: I’ve lost my train of thought.
Participant: It’s going to the Bottle Bank that does my head in, like in the weeks, Friday, Saturday, few bottles of wine, that kind of thing and if you go once a month, all those bottles of wine add up and I go to the Bottle Bank and I think, oh my God, anyone who saw me now would think I was a raging alcoholic, which I’m not for the record, it’s just a few bottles of wine on a weekend but that in itself is just like, oh my God, you’re walking along and it’s all like the glass is clattering together, I’m like, ugh, I’ve got to get someone else to take the bottles for me, it’s embarrassing!
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Sorry! Lost track of things there.
Interviewer: No, no, it’s okay, I’ve remember. So yeah, noticing changes.
Participant: Yeah, so yeah...
Interviewer: Anything else?
Participant: People have those things in their houses, I see people in the supermarkets walking in with their trolley but have already got plastic bags in their trolley and I heard as well, I heard this from... I might have read it somewhere on the internet, there’s this increase thing now where as people go to the supermarket with their bags and their shopping, other people will start nicking the empty bags out of the trolleys because they haven’t brought their own and they don’t want to spend 5p on a new one!
Interviewer: I didn’t actually know that. That’s...
Participant: Yeah, true story, heard it here first! True story!
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think that bag re-use is sufficiently encouraged in Wales?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you think that needs to change?
Participant: Yeah, I think... I think local authorities need to get on it a little bit more, I think the councils need to encourage it and I think the supermarkets themselves need to be a little more upfront and a bit more pushy about it.
Interviewer: Okay. And when the 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge might not apply. Do you think...
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: ...that that’s fair, do you think it’s right or not?
Participant: Well I’d want to know why.
Interviewer: I’m not sure why but I know that medium to small retailers will be exempt.
Participant: Really! Right, okay. Um, well no, I don’t think that’s fair at all, a plastic bag is a plastic bag, you know, it’s like saying if I go to Asda and buy a bottle of wine I’ve got to pay for it but if I go to a small shop it’s going to be free. A bag’s a bag, no matter where you buy it, you should have to pay for it.
Interviewer: Okay. How...
Participant: That’s a really bad analogy actually. Scratch that! But yeah, a bag’s a bag you should pay for it.
Interviewer: Okay! Why was it a bad analogy?
Participant: I don’t know, I think I’ve just talked about wine too much and after my example about going to the Bottle Bank you must be thinking, oh my God!
Interviewer: I don’t, don’t worry. I’m a student.
Participant: Okay, totally neutral! Aye! In Cardiff?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: What are you studying again, environmental science?
Interviewer: Well no, that’s not what I’m studying but...
Participant: Oh!
Interviewer: ...let’s get back to the questionnaire.
Participant: Oh sorry!
Interviewer: That’s okay. So how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, so for example, the congestion charge?
Participant: Um, well proportionally, obviously the congestion charge is quite a bit of money and I’ll avoid driving into the centre of London purely because of the congestion charge, I’ll park outside of the zone and I’ll get the tube or whatever into the middle of town because it’s that expensive, so proportionally 5p for a plastic bag doesn’t even come up on anyone’s radar really, so if it was a lot more obviously people would be a lot more inclined to change their behaviour, so comparatively I don’t think you can really compare the two. One’s a massive charge which has a huge impact on the traffic in central London and the other one it’s what, 5p for a bag, you know, it’s not even having any kind of financial impact on people that is enough to change their behaviour.
Interviewer: And what if they were going to bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, do you think you would support those charges?
Participant: As in like a bag of potatoes you get charged for the plastic?
Interviewer: Mm.
Participant: I would support it if I knew exactly where that money was going. If it was transparent that that money was being used and how it was being used, the finances were in the public domain and stuff then yeah, I probably would if the charge wasn’t too much because if we’re talking like I want to go and buy two carrots and I’m going to get charged 10p for the bag, well you know, that’s quite a large sum of money compared to the cost of two carrots, I would support it so long as it was kind of proportional, I know that kind of goes against what I just said before but yeah, I think then you can’t... You can’t really compare it in the sense that you’re talking about shopping bags and then you’re talking about individual wrapping, I think companies put way too much plastic packaging on some of their products and that has some effect on the decisions I make when I’m buying stuff, if it’s just covered in plastic I’d rather buy something that was not so massively kind of wrapped up in it. I would support it, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of a company, out of curiosity?
Participant: Um, let me think. What did I buy the other day that it was just insane the amount of plastic that was on it and I thought, I’m not buying this again. I think, it was something in Asda actually, I think it was some tomatoes that were in a really thick plastic punnet that was again then wrapped in plastic and was put in a plastic bag and I just thought, there’s more plastic there than tomatoes, you know, so that needs to stop.
Interviewer: Okay, what about a charge on plastic bottles?
Participant: I think that’s a good thing. I remember way back in the day when there was a charge on glass bottles and if you collected glass bottles you could take them back to the shop and get 5p, buy some sweets, winner! But they don’t do that anymore. So yeah, I’d support it.
Interviewer: If you could potentially get the money back?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I think people would be more inclined to recycle, yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s going to raise awareness, I think it will normalise behaviour in the next generation of people who will have grown up in a society where they wouldn’t have known a time where you didn’t get charged for plastic bags, so you know, it’s a good thing, I mean in ten years’ time hopefully it will contribute again, however little it may be but every bit counts to reduce the amount of plastics in the oceans and the rivers and in landfill.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you save water at home?
Participant: I do, yeah, I turn the tap off when I’m brushing my teeth. I take showers not baths. I have my hot water boiler on a timer, so yeah, I’m pretty conscious. I put my washing machine on like an eco-spin so it uses less water. I do all my washing on thirty degrees. So yeah, I’m pretty good with stuff like that.
Interviewer: Why do you save water?
Participant: Because I’ve lived in countries where water is so scarce that you have to so it’s kind of an ingrained learned behaviour really. I’ve lived in countries where, you know, you’re not knowing where your next lot of water’s going to come from so you’ve had to fill up every pot and pan, bath in the house because you just don’t know where the water’s coming from, so from that I’ve learnt that water is a, you know, it’s not a finite resource and even though we can turn the tap on here and water comes out it’s still something that needs to be conserved.
Interviewer: So is it a habit do you think?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, it’s habitual, it’s kind of learned behaviour.
Interviewer: What about saving energy, do you save energy?
Participant: Yeah, I do that, I very rarely put my heaters on, it’s a really well insulated apartment in the first place so I’m really lucky in that sense. My wall heaters when I do put them on I put them on a low setting, nothing is on when I’m out the house, everything’s turned off. Like I say electricity-wise my boiler’s on a timer, I turn all my lights off when I leave the house, I’ve got low energy bulbs, I turn my TV and stuff like that off at the socket before I go to bed.
Interviewer: Why do you save energy?
Participant: Um, because the less energy we use the less detrimental impact on the environment it’s going to have.
Interviewer: And those things that you do are they sort of habits as well?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve always done that, I’ve always been a bit of a hippy in that sense, you know, I don’t like the fact that we’re still burning coal. This year was the first year in the United Kingdom that solar power outstripped fossil fuels, which is good so we’re getting there. Yeah, so the whole energy crisis globally is a massive massive issue and the less we use, you know, if everybody turned their stuff off when they went to bed at night, the power stations could run at less kind of capacity and you know, it’s all good at the end of the day, we all need to use less energy.
Interviewer: And do you ever re-use things at home?
Participant: Yeah, all the time. I repair stuff. I don’t throw much away, I’m not a hoarder, I’m quite minimalist in my apartment, I don’t like collect loads of crap and if something is broken I’ll make efforts to try and fix it myself. Try and give you an example. Electronic stuff, if something’s broken I’ll try and fix it. Books, I buy a lot of books, I recycle books, I won’t throw books in the bin, I give them to charity shops or swap them with friends, I use the library and stuff like that a lot. So yeah, I don’t chuck a lot of stuff away, I try and kind of fix it and use it again to be honest.
Interviewer: And why do you do that?
Participant: I just don’t like... If I throw something away I just know it’s going to end up in a hole in a field somewhere and that breaks my heart really, it’s just it’s not what it should be about and I think it’s from growing up abroad as well where you see how resourceful people are, people don’t throw anything away, they can always get things going again, they can adapt it, they’re ingenious with stuff and I kind of quite like that idea of upcycling and reusing stuff, you know, rather than that sort of consumerist culture where everything’s disposable, you buy it, you use it, you throw it away, you buy it, you use it, you throw it away, it just doesn’t sit right with me, ethically I don’t think it’s really a good thing at all.
Interviewer: And is that kind of habitual as well?
Participant: Yeah, very much so, it’s kind of not just habitual, it’s kind of my ethical and political belief as well is that we’re a society of consumers and it’s a bit of a merry-go-round in the sense that, you know, we work just to fill our houses full of plastic crap which we use once or twice and then throw away and you know, I don’t like that, I like to buy something and know that I can use that for as long as possible and when it’s done hopefully recycle it, give it to someone else who can use it or whatever.
Interviewer: So you don’t recycle household waste then?
Participant: I don’t, no! I’m sorry!
Interviewer: That’s fine!
Participant: But I’m going to, I promise I will.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: I drive... Man, I drove to work today and it’s literally about three miles away. I live down the Bay, my work, my office is on Westgate Street and I drive, how bad is that? Oh no, today I cycled. Sorry! I cycled into work today because of the rugby and I thought it was going to be a nightmare to drive. When the weather’s good I’ll cycle, if it’s crap I’ll drive the car.
Interviewer: So most days?
Participant: I’d probably say about 75% of the time.
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Yeah, I love my eco-driving, I’m not like a boy racer or anything, I’ve got a really fuel efficient car and I’m good with the clutch and I don’t like keep my foot down and burn fuel. I’ll tell you why, that is because I notice how much less fuel you use over a week driving like that, it really, it makes a hell of a difference.
Interviewer: Okay. So using less fuel.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, and the wear and tear on the car is less as well.
Interviewer: And again, is that habitual?
Participant: That’s learned, I had this crazy sports car a few years ago and every time I drove it I could watch the fuel gauge going down, it was so thirsty it was ridiculous and I thought, this is just got to end, it’s just pointless, so I got rid of that, I bought a small little car and realised how much money I could save if I just drove it really... Well call it eco-driving everywhere and it’s true, it does work.
Interviewer: So you cycle to work if it’s sunny.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever walk or cycle for other sort of short distances?
Participant: Yeah, I walk into town sometimes, I cycle round the Bay, round the Barrage, I cycle up the Taff Trail, I cycle to...
Interviewer: Sort of for leisure?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Okay, and how often do you think?
Participant: I try and get out on my bike most weekends, perhaps go round the Bay or go to Roath Park or Bute Park or something or if there’s something going on I’ll cycle to it. And also it means as well if it’s a nice day and I’m meeting friends somewhere I can have, you know, have a meal and a couple of beers and then I haven’t left the car in town and all that kind of thing as well, so there’s kind of a social aspect to it as well I suppose.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: I used to, I used to buy Ecover and I used to use that for pretty much everything but I don’t anymore because I’m a bit sceptical about some of the claims some of the companies make, I think a lot of it is clever marketing and a lot of these cleaning products, especially bleach or ammonia, so to say that something is an environmental cleaning product I think is a bit of a false advertising really.
Interviewer: Okay. So you used to use them but you don’t anymore?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t anymore.
Interviewer: What about organic food?
Participant: I’ve started buying organic eggs because they actually taste like eggs and I’m trying to up the amount of organic food I buy purely because it’s so much tastier, it’s so much nicer for you. I go to the farmer’s market on Riverside most Sundays just to have a mooch about and occasionally I buy some organic food from there, come home and do a Sunday dinner, that type of thing. So I’m buying more organic produce than I ever have before at the moment, to be honest.
Interviewer: And what about food, sort of sustainable food that goes towards sustaining animal welfare, forests or fisheries?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t... I practically refuse to buy any fish now, even though I like fish. The only fish I will eat is fish I’ve caught myself and in the last sort of five years I’ve caught about two fish so I’m not exactly plundering the oceans. I just, I’ve done a lot of kind of reading up on the fish stocks in the North Sea and the international kind of trade in fish and a lot of the fish stocks are way beyond collapsing populations and I just think, you know, the less fish we eat the better, we’ve got to get those populations back up and I don’t like the way the fish are farmed either, you know, and the way that a lot of other species are caught in the nets, it’s just, it’s horrible. So for stuff like that, trying to be a bit more environmentally aware and ecologically sound about buying food, stuff like that I just won’t buy, I won’t buy fish at all and a lot of the meat I buy, I’ll buy locally sourced meat from like Welsh farmers because that means the food has had to travel less of a distance and as a result it’s had less of environmental impact.
Interviewer: How often do you think you buy the locally farmed meats?
Participant: Probably about twice a month. So I’ll buy a load on my monthly shop and then maybe I’ll top-up and buy, I don’t know, some chops or some steak or something like that a couple of weeks later.
Interviewer: Okay, so... Oh, and do you support environmental organisations or issues?
Participant: Um, let me think, do I? I don’t have any direct debits going out of my bank but I sign petitions in town, I support... What do I support? I support more like art stuff to be honest but I have in the past, you know, when I was a teenager I used to go hunt sabbing to disrupt hunts, I used to try and break into factory farms to free the animals so I used to do a lot of direct action stuff but nowadays I’m more of a petition signer than anything.
Interviewer: Okay, that sounds quite cool!
Participant: It’s so much less dangerous!
Interviewer: Yeah! Did you ever succeed?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, freed loads of stuff, yeah, chicken farms, broke up loads of hunts on Dartmoor and places like that.
Interviewer: Wow!
Participant: And the live export in meat that was going on in the mid-nineties down in Plymouth, we managed to blockade the entire port and stop all those animals dying on the way which was really good.
Interviewer: Wow!
Participant: Yeah, it was cool Man!
Interviewer: Yeah, it sounds it!
Participant: Yeah, we were going around squirting fake blood all over all the police’s white shirts, it was all in the papers and everything and it raised loads of media attention and brought the live export thing to a halt which was just brilliant.
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we’ve just talked about, saving water, energy, things like that, have you noticed anything about them since doing the diary period?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely, it’s... I was saying when we first started, actually writing down your behaviours of the day that relate to things like that, firstly it makes you consciously think about it, secondly it makes you kind of reflect about it as well and thirdly it makes you plan about what you’re going to do different to kind of enhance it the next day, I think it’s a brilliant exercise. It takes, you know, anything from ten to twenty, maybe thirty minutes tops in your day and I think it’s a great thing. I’ve already bought some lower energy bulbs for my kitchen cabinets underneath, they were something like 50w now they’re 20, I did that the other day because one of them had blown, I thought I’m just going to change them all and it just, yeah, I think it’s great, really good, keeps you just kind of thinking about it and that’s what people need to do, if it’s in the forefront in everyone’s minds then you’re more likely to act on it.
Interviewer: Okay, so what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Having as little an impact on the environment as possible, you know, just on day-to-day life really, not driving a car, not throwing stuff out, thinking about what you’re buying.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: How concerned am I?
Interviewer: Mm.
Participant: Massively! Said the man who doesn’t recycle! But I am massively concerned about it, I read a lot of science journals about developments in recycling kind of technology, I watch a lot of documentaries about plastic in the oceans, the floating plastic island that’s circulating in the Atlantic, the amount of... When plastic breaks down in the ocean it breaks down to pretty much the same size, these small like beads, they’re pretty much being found in 90% of all fish that are caught now, that’s now coming into the human food chain, it’s just, it’s huge, it’s frightening, absolutely frightening.
Interviewer: So is it mainly waste that you’re worried about?
Participant: Waste and energy.
Interviewer: Waste and energy. Okay. And do you think the environment is an important part of your identity and your life or not...?
Participant: Yeah, absolutely, always has been. I’ve... I kind of, as a teenager I decided that I wasn’t going to live in a house and I lived in a bus and I grew my own food and was very environmental and it’s always kind of, even though it’s a completely different life to what I’ve got now it’s sort of stayed with me, all those kind of things that I used to do to try and raise awareness with other people about environmental issues and you know, that self-sustainability and all that kind of thing, so yeah, it’s a massive thing to me and I talk to other people about it a lot, discuss things about environmental issues because it’s a huge thing now, you know, we’re going to run out of energy, we’re going to run out of food.
Interviewer: How long did you live in a bus for?
Participant: A couple of years, travelling around
Interviewer: Wow!
Participant: Yeah, it was great! It was in a band, it was brilliant!
Interviewer: Okay. And how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I’m, for me, very concerned, I’ve got a black bag in the corner there, nothing in that is recycled, that’s going to go downstairs and that’s going to go straight into landfill and I feel like a massive hypocrite because that’s not how I used to live my life but since I’ve lived in this apartment I’ve just become lazy with it. I work really hard, I get home, I do what I need to do, I go to bed, I get up and repeat and it’s just like I’ve got to make time to do it, so yeah, massively.
Interviewer: We’ve just got a few more sort of questions to get through, I’m a bit conscious of time.
Participant: Yeah, no worries!
Interviewer: So I’ll try and keep it a bit short but...
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so social issues, the economy, health, how important, if at all, are environmental issues to you?
Participant: I think they’re...
Interviewer: So sort of more important, less important...
Participant: I think they’re equally as important as any kind of socio-economic issues.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Because environmental issues are going to have a direct impact on the way we all live if we don’t do something about it.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: I think I do, yeah, you know, I’ve always been very closely following like literature about it, online stuff about it, I’m part of like internet communities that discuss environmental issues quite a lot, so yeah, I think I’m fairly knowledgeable about it.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Interviewer: Would you like to improve your skills or do you think they’re quite adequate?
Participant: Dude, I carved a wooden spoon the other week because I was bored, how cool was that!
Interviewer: Pretty skilful!
Participant: Yeah Man, yeah, it took me hours and I cut all my hands up but it was well worth it, so now I’ve got a spoon that I’ve made, no more plastic spoons!
Interviewer: Okay. And do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: I think, I think nowadays, yes, the council’s providing people with all the facilities they need to recycle, there’s the information out there that’s free, so yeah, I think there’s enough support there.
Interviewer: And from the government?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Interviewer: What do you think about the legislation and regulation in the environmental area in Wales?
Participant: Er, I think the legislation and regulation regarding wind farms is just ridiculous, there should be more of them, I think there’s political incentives that are going against it. I go up to the wind farms in mid-Wales quite a lot, they’re not an eyesore, they’re absolutely beautiful if you stand underneath one, they don’t make loads of noise and I think that more stuff like that needs to happen. You go over to Holland, they’re everywhere, you know, you fly over the North Sea there’s just miles and miles of them, it’s brilliant!
Interviewer: Okay. So what else could or should be done?
Participant: Um, more... Wouldn’t it be great if every house had solar panelled roofs, I think we need to be making the technology cheaper and more available so people can be more self-sufficient in their energy needs.
Interviewer: Okay. And are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: No! [Laughs]
Interviewer: So is that mainly because of the waste that you mentioned, the not recycling?
Participant: Yeah, it’s not energy, I’m really good with the energy I use, I hardly use any. I’m really good in the sense that I support environmental issues, the one thing I’m not good in is that bin bag in the corner is not being recycled and it should be.
Interviewer: So of your environmental behaviours then would you say you’re sort of particularly happy with your energy use but not so happy with your recycling?
Participant: Definitely, yeah, exactly that.
Interviewer: And did you say you’re sort of planning on changing that?
Participant: Yes. Yeah.
Interviewer: So what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: With regards to environmental issues?
Interviewer: No, literally anything, so vandalism, antisocial behaviour, it can be environmental.
Participant: Okay, the... Right, in my immediate neighbourhood, I live in like a gated community thing, so things like the pool isn’t switched off at night so that pool continues to be heated all through the night when no-one’s using it which is a waste. It’s pretty good with the recycling stuff here, which I should do, you can take different bags down to the bin store and they do all that. It’s pretty good, you know, it’s like a new development so it’s all had environmental issues in mind when it’s come to the design and building and planning of it so you know, I can’t really fault anything here really. There aren’t any other issues regards to anti-social behaviour really, I’ve lived in far worse places than this. What are the problems here at the moment? None dude, it’s great, you should live here, it’s brilliant!
Interviewer: Okay. So that’s pretty much all of the interview questions.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Do you have anything to add or to emphasise?
Participant: What was I going to say? I was just a little bit worried that I wasn’t sending enough receipts, pictures of receipts, I took a picture and sent a receipt every time I bought something but I was just concerned that maybe I wasn’t buying enough stuff for the study and then I thought, well that’s not what it’s about, it’s about just me doing my normal behaviour. I’m doing my big monthly shop probably within the next few days but I just was hoping that everything I was putting down on the questionnaire was okay and I wasn’t rambling on too much or anything.
Interviewer: Well the more information the better really, so...
Participant: Okay, cool! Yeah, no worries.
Interviewer: ...if were rambling on then that’s in your favour I guess.
Participant: Okay, brilliant!
Interviewer: So I just want to ask some demographic questions...
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: ...and then that’ll sort of be everything.