Interviewer: Hi I’m, my name’s Emily. I’m calling for the one hour phone interview for the household study.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So yeah, well thank you very much for taking part in the diary study.
Participant: That’s okay.
Interviewer: So today we have one hour to speak. First of all just to talk about your experiences of the diary study and then to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary?
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Yeah. So you’ll have a chance to tell us more on these questions and to clarify your points of view?
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So like with the diary there is no right or wrong answers, we just, we’re just interested in how your daily routine is like and your personal honest points of view?
Participant: Alright, that sounds okay. The dog is asleep at the side of me at the moment, she snores like a trooper so if you can hear a snore then say and I’ll move to the other end of the room.
Interviewer: Oh bless. I have three dogs so…
Participant: Do you? What do you have?
Interviewer: …I know how loudly they can snore.
Participant: Oh well, this is a King Charles Spaniel and they really do snore very, very loudly!
Interviewer: Okay. Do you have any questions before we continue?
Participant: No. I don’t think so. When I spoke to Elena is it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: She seemed to explain everything quite nicely.
Interviewer: So could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: I suppose straightforward really, I suppose it’s difficult, you know, I could have gone into more detail I suppose but I wasn’t quite sure whether that was, you know, whether that would happen during the phone call. So I think it was a bit confusing really to fill in the diary and then to, you know that you’re getting a phone call in a few days’ time so you think “well there’s not much point saying too much in the diary because obviously I’ll be asked certain things in the phone call”. So do you get where I’m coming from? Do you understand that?
Interviewer: Yeah. So you, did you just sort of write down the main relevant information?
Participant: Yeah. I just answered, yeah, just the main things, yeah.
Interviewer: Was there anything quite tedious to write down?
Participant: No, not really. I thought, in fact I thought if anything it probably would have been sort of more detail than it was really, you know, it was similar questions every day and I just thought, you know, you might have had a lot more to answer, you know, it was quite basic really wasn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah?
Interviewer: We didn’t want to fill people with too much of a heavy task to do every day.
Participant: Yeah. Well I suppose so because then some people, I’m the kind of person if I start something I’ll see it through whereas not a lot of people are like that are they? They just say “I can’t be bothered with this”.
Interviewer: Yeah, exactly.
Participant: That’s that kind of attitude I think. But I think that probably is an age thing as well, you know, I’m of a different generation where if I do start something I will see it through to the end. So for me, you know, it could have been, the study could have been more, you know, I was quite happy to offer more information really.
Interviewer: So do you think that’s almost a negative?
Participant: Yeah. Well you see I don’t know what you’re actually doing with this, well I have an idea of what you’re doing with the information but I don’t know whether the questions that you ask are so limited really that it’s going to give you the picture that you require, you know.
Interviewer: Well that’s, we can bear that in mind maybe the next time we do a similar study.
Participant: Yeah. Or you could totally ignore me because I don’t know what I’m talking about! [Laughs] I’ll leave it to you really but to me I just thought well you, you know, I wouldn’t have mind doing more, you know, sort of giving more information and, you know, rather than the few questions that you asked.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you?
Participant: What, from the…?
Interviewer: From the diary?
Participant: In what way? In what way would you say?
Interviewer: Just anything that, you know, answering the diary you didn’t really expect? I guess maybe just the fact that the questions weren’t as detailed as maybe you were expecting?
Participant: Exactly. I thought, I know that Elena said “it will probably take you about ten minutes or so” but even so, you know, it was a bit sort of samey and it could have been a little more detailed I think, you know, but that’s just my opinion.
Interviewer: Could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Well what, for the week or, I’m quite sort of a creature of habit really in as much as I shop online for the main shop of the week so that I get the bulk of the shopping delivered for the house.
Interviewer: So that’s a weekly shop?
Participant: That’s the weekly shop and that always is a Tuesday. And then usually by a Saturday I need to top up, now that’s local, I don’t stick to one particular shop for that, it depends where I am, what I’m doing, which ones I’m passing really as to where I shop for a top up.
Interviewer: More convenience than brand?
Participant: Exactly, yeah.
Interviewer: What shop do you do your weekly shop? You said you did it online?
Participant: At the moment it’s with Tesco. I get a weekly shop from Tesco on a Tuesday.
Interviewer: And is there a particular reason why you like to shop at Tesco?
Participant: Oh well I was shopping at Asda regularly and that got a bit hit and miss with substitutions, things that you, you know, you’ve ordered and they didn’t have in stock, delivery times were a bit hit and miss as well and I’d shopped a lot at Tesco in the past, again I think it’s just a convenience thing, it’s not a loyalty thing, it’s just a case of this service that Tesco are offering at the moment is very good.
Interviewer: They rarely run out of stock, that kind of thing?
Participant: Exactly, yeah. That has just seemed to improve. I know that Tesco’s been in trouble financially so maybe they’re sort of pulling out all the stops now but I’ve certainly seen a difference in the service you get now, you don’t get as many substitutions, the delivery, it’s one hour slots now instead of two which makes it much easier, you often get a text if they’re running late, all of these things make it a much better experience really, so much more convenient. And then at the weekend if I’m out and about, you know, we always need to top up at the weekend, I might, if there’s a local farmer’s market on I do visit that but they are very expensive and it’s only once a month and I may not be going in that direction but I do use the local farmer’s market and I like to buy nice bread at the weekend so, and that’s locally made and the ingredients are all local as well.
Interviewer: So do you like to support the local…?
Participant: Most definitely. Most definitely but you have to, you have to take into cost as well. I try and save a few pennies on, to buy locally it always is more expensive so I try and save a few pennies at Tesco and then what I’ve saved there I think “right, well I can afford now to spend £3.50 on that sourdough”.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s nice.
Participant: Because I’ve saved a little bit at Tesco this week and that’s, you know, that tends to be how I shop really.
Interviewer: Is there a particular reason why you do your shopping online rather than going to the…?
Participant: I don’t see the point of, I just think it’s a total waste of time. I do not see the point of going into a store and walking round filling your basket, taking it to the checkout, taking all your things out of your basket, putting them on, packing your basket, putting them in the car, taking them home, I don’t see the point in any of that. It’s just a total waste of time. I’m coming up to 60 years of age now and I never thought that I would be such a convert to shopping online as I am. I would not, nothing would persuade me to go and do a weekly shop in store, nothing. Nothing.
Interviewer: So it’s very much the convenience of it all then, it’s just a lot easier?
Participant: Absolutely. Well who wants to go weekly shopping? I can’t, you know, some people like it don’t they? But I just, I don’t understand that at all. I hate it. I like my weekend shopping, my weekend little shop because that tends to be for a few little luxury items at the weekend so I find that more interesting if you understand?
Interviewer: When you do your top up shops then how do you normally travel to the stores that you go to?
Participant: Usually how I do, usually on a Saturday I’ll probably go for a trip out somewhere. I live in West Yorkshire and I might…
Interviewer: So do you walk or bus or…?
Participant: Well I’d probably be, I’d be in the car going out somewhere for the day and passing say Lidl or M&S or wherever and then that’s where I would pop in.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Yeah, so that’s how I’d do it. It wouldn’t be, I haven’t really thought about this, I don’t really sort of make a conscious decision to think “right well I need to get some bread today” or whatever, it’s a case of “where can I go today? The weather’s quite nice. I’ll tell you what I’ll go to Fountains Abbey. Oh but I need some bread, I’ll pick some bread up on the way”, that kind of thing. So whichever direction I’m passing in really.
Interviewer: And do you know roughly how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: As little as possible because I will freeze things. If, I will, like if I’m making something, I’m trying to think what, what it might be. Something like, um, a spaghetti bolognaise or something like that, I will then, if there’s any left, we are vegetarians, if there’s any leftover mince Quorn I will then turn that into a shepherd’s pie or something like that. So very, very little waste. Bread when it gets to the end of a loaf of bread I’ll make some croutons out of it.
Interviewer: Oh that’s clever.
Participant: And they will keep for months. So I don’t like waste, again that might be a generation thing, I don’t like waste, so very, very little.
Interviewer: Would you mind telling me why you’re a vegetarian?
Participant: Well I’ve been a vegetarian for over thirty years now.
Interviewer: Oh wow. Well done.
Participant: It’s easier these days to be a vegetarian than it was thirty years ago. I’m heavily involved in animal rights, I’m also really concerned about the environment, I’m concerned about animal welfare, and quite honestly, you know, if, I think if you could, the other side of it is I think if you could actually kill an animal in order to eat it then fair dos I suppose but I could never do that. So I don’t disassociate myself from that sentient being, you know, I couldn’t go out and kill a sheep in order to feed my family so therefore I don’t, I’m not really deserving to eat it. That’s one argument and so the biggest argument for me is I believe that they are sentient beings, they’re not ours to eat. So I’ve been vegetarian for a long, long time.
Interviewer: Please could you tell me in five words or expressions that sort of come to your mind when you hear plastic bag?
Participant: Plastic bag, I just think of the environment. I also think of people leaving rubbish around in plastic bags, that sort of springs to mind for me as well.
Interviewer: Like visible litter?
Participant: Yes, exactly. I think they’re a waste as well. I don’t know if that’s five? Those are the ones that come to mind.
Interviewer: Do you remember that point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: I think, yes I do. Yeah I do, yeah.
Interviewer: And could you tell us about it a little bit?
Participant: Oh I mean at the time you don’t, I suppose with a lot of things you don’t really give it that much thought and I just thought “oh this is really quite convenient” you know, to just pick up a plastic bag in the supermarket. I think you had to pay for them though, I think that was the thing at one time, I think you had to actually pay for your plastic bag as far as I can remember. So I can remember buying biscuits as a child and you’d get them in brown paper bags from the local shop, they’d weigh them out for you and I mean that’s becoming quite trendy again now isn’t it, you know, to be able to do that? You know, but I sort of remember that. So I suppose, yeah, with the plastic bags I think I, initially I probably thought “yeah, well this is really convenient”, just to be able to go to a supermarket and put your stuff into a plastic bag but they did make a charge for them. And I suppose my initial thoughts on that was cheeky so-and-so’s because really you’re advertising their store.
Interviewer: By carrying the bag?
Participant: If you go into the Co-op, yeah, to go into the Co-op and you’re paying 2p for a Co-op carrier bag, you’re actually advertising that store for them aren’t you?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: But I think even then going back to then I think I always sort of reused them, you know, they never sort of went straight in the bin, there was always a use for them, you know, I’ve maybe used them a couple of times, you know, maybe to wrap things in or something like that.
Interviewer: And what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping in now? I guess because you do it online?
Participant: Well I have the bags for life now, yeah. But the bags from the weekly shop with Tesco they did used to give you an option whereby you didn’t, you could have your shopping delivered without bags. Now the problem with that, well that was the option that I chose but the problem with that it seemed that the guys that used to deliver the shopping obviously it took them a lot longer if there’s no, if the shopping’s not in carrier bags it took them a lot longer to deliver your shopping and they were a lot…
Interviewer: Oh right, because they were carrying it loose?
Participant: Well they were carrying it in the plastic crates as they would, normally your shopping goes inside a carrier bag inside a plastic crate, they bring the crates up and then they hand you the plastic bags, but if you get your shopping without plastic bags then that takes them a lot longer to drop off your shopping because they can’t leave the crates behind. So they’re passing you individual items, you know, they’re passing you your eggs and your potatoes and whatever as an, rather than the carrier bag full.
Interviewer: So is the option still there now?
Participant: Well I don’t think the option is there anymore.
Interviewer: So it just comes in the single use…?
Participant: It comes in the biodegradable, they did change to biodegradable bags which is something I suppose. But there is, they’re going to have to rethink this I think because I’ve heard again on the grapevine that maybe next month or the month after they’re going to start charging for carrier bags so people are not going to want to pay for them. So they’re going to have to come up with some, I don’t know, some idea of, because you could tell when the delivery men came they weren’t happy “oh this is a customer that doesn’t want their shopping delivered in plastic bags”.
Interviewer: Oh that’s a bit of a shame.
Participant: “Therefore this, yeah, therefore this drop is going to take us ages because we’re passing” but that’s not their fault is it? That’s the fault of Tesco isn’t it? They should allow them more time to make their deliveries.
Interviewer: And when you use your bags for life on your weekend sort of top up shops, do you, is that kind of an automatic thing, do you already have one on you or…?
Participant: Yeah. I think it becomes an automatic thing when you’re trying to avoid having plastic bags and packaging, I think it becomes an automatic thing really. I do buy certain things from Amazon, groceries as well as other things and the amount of packaging that comes from Amazon is absolutely obscene.
Interviewer: I’ve noticed that too actually recently.
Participant: Why? You know, why have lots and lots of bubble wrap, lots and lots of brown, beige-y brown packing paper, plus the cardboard box? It’s absolutely obscene and I mean it costs, it must cost them a fortune apart from anything else and it can be the simplest of things and it still comes in so much packing. They should be able to fine people for using so much packaging.
Interviewer: Yeah, I’ve noticed that with Amazon too actually.
Participant: Yeah, terrible.
Interviewer: So you kind of consciously try to avoid using excess packaging and plastics?
Participant: Definitely. And if I do, and if I do get an Amazon order or something and it has got, well it will have lots of packaging, it always has lots of packaging, I tend to save that packaging. The bubble wrap, I will save that and I’ve got mountains and mountains of bubble wrap, so I would never have to buy that and it will be used again so it makes me feel a little bit better. But I mean they ask you what are your views on their packaging and you tell them what your views are and nothing seems to change really and it just seems ludicrous because apart from anything else it must be costing them a fortune. A paperback could come in a biodegradable cardboard envelope which often it does but I’ve known it come in a box with bubble wrap and brown…
Interviewer: Yeah, I know what you mean.
Participant: Why?
Interviewer: The plastic filled with air?
Participant: Yeah. Why do that? It does not make any sense at all but what can you do?
Interviewer: So is that your, so you said you like to avoid excess packaging and plastics, what are your reasons for wanting to avoid those things and why does it make you feel sort of bad when you do use plastics?
Participant: I think I’m, you know, I like to sort of be aware of the environment really all around. I don’t have grandchildren but hopefully one day I will and I want to leave the planet in a reasonable state for them, you know. So I suppose it’s as simple as that really.
Interviewer: And what is it about sort of bags for life that you like and why do you use these as opposed to other kinds of bags like other plastic bags or your own bags?
Participant: Well the bags for life I have are sort of like the hessian ones.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, I know.
Participant: They’re light enough to carry, they’re not inconvenient to put one in your bag, in your pocket, you know, and it’s just you are aware I think when you’re using them that you are actually doing your little bit. It’s a tiny, tiny little drop in the ocean but is a little bit to help the environment really.
Interviewer: And they’re quite heavy duty as well those, the ones you’re describing?
Participant: They are very heavy duty, exactly. Yeah.
Interviewer: So where do you tend to store your bags and, you know, the hessian bags that you take with you when you go to your shop?
Participant: Where do I store them, what en-route to the shop you mean or at home?
Interviewer: Well both actually?
Participant: Well at home there’s usually one in the hallway hanging up by the front door, that’s all very convenient isn’t it? And then there’s a couple in the kitchen hanging up same place behind the door. And then often there’s one just folded in my handbag. You just get into the habit I think of just keeping one on you just to avoid if possible, it’s not always possible, you sometimes, you know, you do forget or you sometimes buy more than you anticipate so, but there are sometimes those occasions when you will have to use a plastic bag. But one of the shops I shop in actually for my pet food they’re really good there, they actually, they never give you a new carrier bag but people donate carrier bags to them.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good.
Participant: So you, it is a good idea isn’t it?
Interviewer: I’ve never heard of that before.
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s a brilliant idea. You go in and you buy your pet food and it might come out in a Co-op bag. So at least, you know, it’s something.
Interviewer: And you view that quite positively then?
Participant: Absolutely. Absolutely. I think everybody should do that. I know Tesco they do actually take back your carrier bags and the drivers are quite good at the moment, they will say “do you have any plastic bags to return?” So I think that’s quite positive as well.
Interviewer: Oh what the online, when you do the online shop?
Participant: When you do your online shopping.
Interviewer: Do you know what they then do with the bags that you do return?
Participant: Good question. No, I’ve not. They recycle them but into what, I don’t know. I mean it is, they do say that it’s for recycling.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s interesting.
Participant: So that’s again I suppose is another positive thing isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah. So in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I don’t think it is important. People would shoot me down for that but I think if you just get into the habit of having a bag on you and having a bag for life or they’re not expensive to buy, so I suppose I can see now why some stores want to charge for the carrier bags because that then will make people more aware and it will make them at least reuse them because it’s money in the bin otherwise isn’t it, you know? People look at it like that. I mean I’ve got a lot more conscious really of the fuel bills but that really has come about not through any green issue, it is more now but I think initially it was a case, it was the cost. So often the cost of something makes you stop and think that actually there’s ways that I can reduce this, not just for my benefit but for the benefit of the planet as well.
Interviewer: So if plastic bags completely disappeared from all shops how do you think you’d find that?
Participant: Me personally it wouldn’t bother me at all. I think it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Because you’d already have your hessian bag with you?
Participant: I would. [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay. So you’ve already said that you do reuse bags when you can? Do you ever use plastic bags as sort of like a liner in the bin, like maybe a small bin in your bedroom or something?
Participant: Have done, yes.
Interviewer: Is there any particular reason?
Participant: If I, I suppose if I have a plastic bag and I don’t know what to do with it, rather than just throw it away I think “oh I’ll line the bin with it” because otherwise I might, you know, I’m just getting a bag of bins on a roll, what’s the point of using one of those when I can reuse this? So I am pretty good at reusing things.
Interviewer: And do you happen to know how many plastic bags you currently have at home roughly? You don’t need to go count them but…
Participant: I would say no more than five.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Yeah. I have a thing in the kitchen like a plastic bag dispenser that you save your plastic bags in and there’s never many in there. So I would approximate about five. Yeah, I would think maybe that many.
Interviewer: So are you aware of what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: What, to produce or what, what they’re going to charge for them?
Interviewer: Yeah. So it’s just a national charge of 5p for single use plastic carrier bags.
Participant: Is it, I think it’s, I think it’s quite expensive.
Participant: Yeah. I think that is quite a lot of money really but that’s a good thing, that is definitely a good thing. Because if you’re going to get five bags of shopping that’s 25p and now some people shop every day, I mean if you’ve got a big family and you’re shopping and, you know, people can have ten bags of shopping in the boot of the car, that will mount up so…
Interviewer: Have you sort of heard about this charge before?
Participant: I have. I have and I know it’s going to be, and this is what I was saying about Tesco and home deliveries in general, they’re going to have to, people are not going to want to pay that and to have your shopping delivered without carrier bags it takes the drivers twice as long to make a drop.
Interviewer: So how did you sort of hear about the charges, was it more hearing about it from independent stores or Tesco?
Participant: No. I would have thought it was possibly something on the radio that I heard. I listen to Radio 4 on an afternoon and that’s quite informative on all sorts of things so possibly that’s where I heard that. But it wasn’t from Tesco.
Interviewer: And I was going to ask you what you think about the 5p plastic bag charge but it sounds like you’re quite in favour?
Participant: I’m absolutely in favour of it, yeah. It will come as a shock to people but people will then find other ways round the situation.
Interviewer: Right. Like bringing their own bags?
Participant: Yeah, like taking their own bags when they go shopping.
Interviewer: And when you say…
Participant: And once you…
Interviewer: Sorry, carry on?
Participant: And once you get into the habit of doing that it’s not a chore, you know, it’s like putting your shoes on when you leave the house, you know, it’s just something, you may just have a bag stuffed in your coat, you know, and coat pocket and it’s not something really you think about.
Interviewer: So it becomes a habit?
Participant: Just becomes a habit.
Interviewer: So when you said 5p was quite expensive, do you think that’s a good thing that it’s a bit pricey or do you think…?
Participant: Yeah, I do actually, you know, I think maybe even 10p.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: Yeah. Because, you know, people are going to have to sort of be more responsible for what they do. People have to try and think about recycling, reusing things, they have to think, you know, they do have to take it onboard. So yeah, I mean 5p is not expensive but, you know, I can still see some people not thinking that is such a big issue, especially if they’re just going to buy a couple of items and it’s one carrier bag, but when it comes to a weekly shop where you might have ten/fifteen bags of shopping, yeah, it is going to mount up so people will have to take it onboard.
Interviewer: So do you find the introduction of the charge surprising or…?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What makes…?
Participant: Because I would be quite happy if people like Amazon for example could be fined for overuse of packaging. I would be quite happy with that situation. It’s like when you buy your shopping as well, you know, and you’re getting, you may get some tomatoes for example and they’re in a polystyrene tray covered in plastic, it is, these things are not necessary.
Interviewer: I suppose when you go to the farmer’s market as well it’s not like that, is it all just quite loose?
Participant: Exactly.
Interviewer: So maybe that’s one of the reasons you like to go?
Participant: Yeah. So yeah, and it’s supporting local people as well and that’s another big factor. The produce is interesting, you know, it’s nice to be able to chat to somebody as well, they’re more likely to talk, you know, rather than somebody sitting on a checkout that’s got to keep going, got to keep going, you know, it’s more of an occasion really I suppose to go to the farmer’s market. I mean don’t get me wrong it’s only once a month that we have them locally and I don’t religiously think “oh it’s Saturday, yippee it’s the farmer’s market” and I’m off there like a shot, it’s not like that, it’s when it’s on if I’m available, it is, you know, I’m going in that direction, it is nice and it’s a nice experience to be able to buy your produce. They cut back on packaging, it’s all local and I suppose it’s a bit of feel good factor really. You pay more, it is more expensive undoubtedly but then you have to, you know, they’re not Tesco’s, they’re not Asda’s, they’re local independent people that are trying to make a living.
Interviewer: So just back to the plastic bag charge, so did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced into England in October?
Participant: I knew it was going to be, I think I said to you within the next couple of months so yeah, so I’m not far off. Because it’s already in Wales isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah, it is.
Participant: Yeah. So I knew I wasn’t far off and yeah, I think, I don’t think there’s a lot of people that are aware. They’re going to be shocked aren’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah. So did you hear about that on the radio like you…?
Participant: I think I heard about that on the radio I would say, yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well I suppose it’s an environmental issue, it’s to get people to cut back on waste, to think more about recycling, those kind of issues really.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s more just to help the environment or do you think also it’s to make people aware maybe of environmental issues?
Participant: I think it’s more for the environment but I think it will have both effects of making people more aware.
Interviewer: Yeah, when you say they’ll be shocked?
Participant: They will be shocked.
Interviewer: Maybe they’ll then be questioning why, why is this happening?
Participant: Exactly.
Interviewer: So and do you think the plastic bag charge will help to tackle these issues that you’ve just mentioned?
Participant: I think it’s a step in the right direction.
Interviewer: Yeah, so maybe not alone but…?
Participant: No, definitely not alone, it’s a drop in the ocean but I think it’s a step in the right direction and I think anything really that just gets people thinking.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you, are you living in England at the moment?
Participant: I do, yes.
Interviewer: So do you, mm, you’ve already said actually that the plastic bag charge won’t necessarily affect you will it if you’re already carrying your own bags?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So you think you’ll carry on using the same bags that you’re using and…?
Participant: Oh I’m sure because it’s second nature now to do that. I mean there will be the odd occasion when, you know, you buy more than you think you might buy and so you will then have to buy a plastic carrier bag but I’m quite happy to pay £10 for one, you know, because I think I am aware of what’s behind it, you know. I think there will be a lot of people initially just thinking “oh well, this is the supermarkets isn’t it making even more money out of us?”
Interviewer: Yeah, I definitely think some people will have that opinion.
Participant: Yeah. That will be that opinion I think to begin with.
Interviewer: In general but not by yourself?
Participant: No. Definitely not by me, no.
Interviewer: So the charge probably won’t change your shopping behaviour or bag use then because you’re already quite prepared?
Participant: I’m already quite prepared but obviously I do get the bulk of my shopping from Tesco and that is delivered in carrier bags, so what’s going to happen? What they’re going to do and be interesting to see really.
Interviewer: So if there’s no option to not have bags do you think you’ll still buy your shopping from there with all the carrier bags?
Participant: Well yeah, you know, I’ll still, I’ll continue to get my shopping from Tesco because I think the other option then is to give the bags back so that they can recycle them or you just, you use them yourself or I’ll drop them off at the pet shop and, you know, but I won’t sort of unpack my shopping and throw the bag in the bin, you know, there will be a use for it.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think the plastic bag charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: Not me personally but I think in general then definitely in time. In time, I think it will take a bit of time for some people because I think initially a lot of people will be thinking “oh this is the supermarkets making yet more money”. And then once they realise that’s maybe not the issue and it is more about an environmental issue, then maybe then yes people will take it onboard. But sadly some people that will never really get it, you know, they’ll just think “well”, there’s some people that are in my opinion quite selfish, that they just think “well I’m living now, you know, this is what I do and I won’t be here in the future so why should I care?”
Interviewer: Yeah, there are definitely…
Participant: Kind of thing.
Interviewer: …some people with that opinion.
Participant: Yeah. There’s a lot isn’t there of people with that kind of attitude really? That’s why I think possibly 5p is maybe, it is a lot but it’s maybe not enough.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay. Do you think there will be any other changes after the introduction of this charge or not?
Participant: I don’t know. I suppose the [sighs], the next stage then could be to cut down on packaging in stores, I suppose that is, now I’d like to see people fined for using too much packaging because it isn’t necessary, you know. You buy, you can buy some onions and they come in a plastic net, you know, garlic the same, why is that necessary? It isn’t necessary. Isn’t necessary. So I think that could be something really that could be looked at.
Interviewer: Yeah, in online places like Amazon definitely.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Oh definitely.
Interviewer: Do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in England?
Participant: No, maybe not. You know, I can’t really speak for other people but yeah, I sort of know that people really are quite disposable aren’t they now? You know, we do live in a disposable society and people are also quite selfish and they don’t want to think about the environment, it’s just what is, you know, what is convenient for me now. So no, I don’t think so.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s something that needs to be changed?
Participant: Yeah, I do. I do. But quite how I’m not entirely sure, but yeah. I think children at school are becoming more aware of these issues and it’s almost seen as to be quite cool now to recycle things.
Interviewer: Hopefully?
Participant: Hopefully!
Interviewer: So do you think that by, oh I’ve just already asked you that. When the 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of bags and some types of shops where the charge might not apply like quite small shops don’t necessarily have to charge then for their bags?
Participant: Really?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: Yeah, so I’m interested to know if you think it’s fair that, so basically large supermarkets with a certain number of staff will employ the 5p charge, whereas smaller corner shops are exempt from it so they can still give away bags for free?
Participant: Well I’d like to know why they’re exempt from it?
Interviewer: That’s a good question.
Participant: Before I can sort of answer that really I’d like to know sort of why? I mean it’s not as though, it’s the customer that’s paying the cost, not the shopkeeper, so why? Why make, it sounds ridiculous.
Interviewer: So do you think that’s unfair?
Participant: Yeah, I do actually. Yeah, I do.
Interviewer: And a bit confusing?
Participant: Very confusing.
Interviewer: Yeah. I personally actually I couldn’t tell you why which goes to show that it isn’t maybe clear enough? Maybe it will become clearer when the charges…
Participant: Maybe it will become clearer but the way I look at it is it’s the customer that is paying for the plastic bag, not the supermarket, it’s the customer. So if that’s the case and to think you can get your plastic bag for free in a local shop, in a corner shop or something like that is downright ludicrous. It doesn’t make sense at all.
Interviewer: How do you think…
Participant: It’s quite hypocritical really.
Interviewer: Yeah, it is a bit. It’s a bit cheeky.
Participant: Isn’t it?
Interviewer: Because you might get people taking plastic bags from the smaller shop and then using those? I don’t know.
Participant: But then you can say they are reusing them at least.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s true.
Participant: But no, it’s silly. I can’t…
Interviewer: It might bias businesses a bit though because you might be more inclined to shop at a smaller shop where you know you don’t have to pay for the bags?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t know about that though. The smaller shops can’t have the special offers that the bigger shops have so it’s counterproductive as well. It’s just ludicrous and I think whoever has decided upon that hasn’t really thought that through very well.
Interviewer: Okay. How do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as, you know, there’s a congestion charge in London I think, charges on plastic bottles and things like that?
Participant: How does it compare?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I still don’t think it’s high enough the charge for plastic bags. I still don’t think that is high enough at 5p.
Interviewer: So possibly not as effective?
Participant: Possibly not.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you support the idea of other types of charges like charging for plastic bottles and plastic packaging?
Participant: Plastic bottles I’m not sure because you have to get your liquid in something don’t you? You can’t really be leaving the house with a jug to get your milk and stuff like that, so I’m not sure on that one. But plastic packaging on your pre-packed, I don’t see why everything has to be pre-packed, you know, you buy your apples and they come in a plastic bag and I think Morrisons are probably one of the worst culprits for that or at least they used to be because nothing in their store was ever, well at least in my local store was never, you couldn’t just go and buy a couple of apples, it would be eight apples in a bag or eight oranges in a bag, you never had the option like at least I suppose you do with Tesco and Asda to buy your apples that way or you can just buy two. In Morrisons it tended to be that you had to buy, everything was in a plastic bag.
Interviewer: So it kind of depends on what the charge is and…?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So now we’re just moving onto sort of other household behaviours, so do you save water at home?
Participant: I don’t have a water meter but I am quite, again I’m quite aware. I do try and save as much as I can.
Interviewer: Sort of how would you do that?
Participant: How do I do that?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well the washing machine, I use an economy wash on the washing machine. I recently had a new shower put in that is more efficient than the old one. We turn the taps off when we brush our teeth. I’ve recently got a free, I sent off for a free pack of various little things from Yorkshire Water and one was a timer for the shower, so it’s just a little plastic timer, it’s not attached to the shower in any way and you just pop it on the side and then if you finish your shower in that time, I think it’s four minutes, then there’s a leaflet that comes with it and tells you how many gallons of water you will save by doing that. You also get a couple of things that you put in the water system that fill up and expand so that you don’t use as much water when you flush the toilet. There’s also little adapters you get in the pack that again you can fit them onto your taps and they save water. So I am…
Interviewer: What encourages you to save the water?
Participant: Again it’s an environment issue. And also at the time of, which I still haven’t got, well it’s a little story, I can tell you about that, but at the time of getting this pack which wasn’t entirely free, I was thinking of having a water meter. So I think all of those things are going to help me to save money and that are just better all round for everybody. I did have a water meter, I still haven’t got round to having one installed but I’m using all these gadgets, I did have a water meter from Yorkshire Water a few years ago, they had a free offer at the time where you could have this meter installed for free for twelve months and then after the twelve months if you didn’t, if you weren’t happy they would take the meter out for free. So myself and a neighbour we decided that we would both do this. She halved her bills…
Interviewer: Oh wow.
Participant: …by doing that, whereas my bill didn’t, I saved about £1 a month which was, for the measures that I’d put in place just seemed an awful lot of effort. So I sort of thought at the time “there must be a leak somewhere” and it just didn’t make sense that she halved her bills and mine was more or less the same as before. But it is something that, it’s one of those things that I’ve recently had a new shower put in, I’ve recently got this pack from Yorkshire Water and I am seriously thinking of having a meter again. So then I will obviously even be looking at other ways to cut back.
Interviewer: Do you save energy at home as well?
Participant: Definitely. This year I’ve had a new A-rated boiler put in with a thermostat so it should save a lot more energy than the previous boiler. But that’s to be tested really because that’s only, that’s only come about in the last, uh, two weeks ago I had the boiler installed and then about a few days ago he came to put the thermostat on so I haven’t really, I can’t really comment on that at the moment but in theory it’s meant to save some money and be kinder to the environment.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Not often at all. Probably about three times a week.
Interviewer: So do you tend to save car trips?
Participant: I do. My daughter drives, she drives to work every day so again I know it’s the environment but also its cost. If I know that Emily, because my daughter’s also called Emily, if she’s going in one direction then I will say “right, well Emily can you give me a lift?” you know, so we’re sharing that way. And I’ll either get a lift back from somebody or, you know, I’ll walk back if it’s not too far.
Interviewer: So is that a habit or more of a conscious thing?
Participant: I think it’s habit really. I don’t like public transport, I hate public transport. I mean we don’t really have a very good bus service where I live. I think it’s considered a more affluent area which is a bit of a joke really but I think that’s how they look at it so therefore we don’t need a bus service.
Interviewer: Okay. And when [overtalking], sorry?
Participant: Sorry. We did have quite a good bus service and they just diverted everything around so if I wanted to let’s say go to Tesco for example which I’ve no desire to but should I want to go, it would be quicker for me to walk there than to actually walk to my bus stop. So I suppose it’s just, it’s because of that I think, because of the bus service that we have round here that’s been cutback, cutback, cutback, that I suppose, you know, with that you do sort of say, you know, as I say to my daughter, you know “are you going anywhere near so-and-so on Wednesday, you know, could you drop me off? Could you give me a lift?”
Interviewer: Okay. Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: All the time.
Interviewer: And is that an environmental thing as well?
Participant: Most definitely, yeah. We buy Ecover and recently I started buying Method. I think they’re fairly new product so I’m testing those out. There’s a couple of the products I’ve used that I don’t like but there’s a couple of the products that I do like, like the shower cleaner is very good and very effective. But I think Ecover takes some beating really.
Interviewer: So all of these sort of behaviours like saving water, saving energy, the car, buying eco-friendly cleaning products, are these sort of habitual, are they habits or do you mindfully do these things?
Participant: Well to begin with I suppose it was mindfully but now it’s just a habit that that’s what we do, those are the products that we buy. I suppose it’s like buying lacto-free milk, you know, it’s what you do, it’s what you use at home. So I don’t sort of use the washing-up liquid and think “oh you’re good aren’t you? You know, how good are you?” you know, it’s just a habit now that we do.
Interviewer: Do you buy organic food?
Participant: More often than not, yes.
Interviewer: Why? What inclines you to buy organic food?
Participant: Because I, I suppose I think of pesticides, again I think it’s, you know, it’s better for you to have…
Interviewer: So is that sort of health, pesticides?
Participant: It’s better for you, your health to have your fruit and vegetables that are organic and of course then there’s the environment that comes into that as well. It’s better for the environment.
Interviewer: And do you buy sustainable food that sort of, you know, contributes towards helping sustain forests and animal welfare and things like that?
Participant: I do, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you support environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: Well yes I do support, yes.
Interviewer: How would you go about supporting these things?
Participant: I think by being aware of the issues really.
Interviewer: Okay. So all of these behaviours I’ve just sort of mentioned, have you noticed anything about them during the diary period?
Participant: I think you might have to give me an example on what sort of thing?
Interviewer: So buying organic food, eco-friendly cleaning products, saving water, saving energy, have you, when you were filling out the diary did you notice anything?
Participant: Well no, I suppose really what, you know, maybe what has come to mind is that I do try and do my bit which is a bit more than some but it’s maybe not enough. I could, it has made me think more. So there are other things that, you know, there’s room for improvement without being too taxing, you know, without making a major effort there are other small things that you can do.
Interviewer: So what does, you know, sort of the phrase environmentally friendly behaviour, what does that mean to you when you hear that?
Participant: Environmentally friendly behaviour?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: It means that you’re just aware of the environment, the planet that we live on and that you’re for helping that cause and your behaviour is you do your bits and pieces what you can to, like you recycle, those things to help that cause.
Interviewer: So what, I know we’ve talked a lot about your sort of concern for the environment, what exactly types of issues are you concerned about with regard to the environment?
Participant: Crikey, um… That’s quite difficult to answer really strangely enough, that should be easy to answer shouldn’t it? But it, what am I concerned about? I’m just concerned in general about the environmental health of our nation I suppose. It’s, you know, find that one quite difficult to answer really. I mean it…
Interviewer: Yeah. I mean before you wanted, you know, you want to have grandchildren and leave them a nice environment?
Participant: Yeah, you know, mankind is responsible for so many issues and, you know, we are selfish and I think that, you know, I mean the planet is, you know, we’re overpopulated as well, you know, there’s nothing much that I can do about that but it is a worry for generations to come.
Interviewer: So it sounds like your concerns are, they’re not specific to one environmental issue…
Participant: No, just a general.
Interviewer: …it’s everything to do with protecting the environment?
Participant: Yeah. I think everybody should give it some thought and everybody should try and do a little bit and I think, you know, recycling, I think landfill, all of these things that, you know, people need to give a little more thought to.
Interviewer: Do you think the environment is an important part of your identity then?
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Or not?
Participant: For me, no… No, I don’t really look at it like that.
Interviewer: Okay. Is it an important part of your life?
Participant: I think, again [sighs] I suppose it is more than I think it is. I’ve never been asked that question but I suppose it is more than, these things are just things that I do because I believe that they’re right to, you know, to help conserve certain energies and, you know, I mean we’ve seen how, well I have seen how the weather has changed for example, the seasons have, the seasons have changed from when I was a child and it’s not just a case of oh you romanticise about these things, they definitely have. You know, summers were better summers, winters were more severe really, and now it’s a case of, you know, we barely get the summer and we don’t, we barely get a winter, you know, it’s pretty mediocre.
Interviewer: How concerned are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I think, I mean I think I am quite concerned about that. We have three wheelie bins and they empty them every two weeks now and I say that I, you know, I do try and use, but even so, even though I do try and reuse things our bins are full.
Interviewer: Is that non-recyclable waste or recyclable?
Participant: That’s both.
Interviewer: Both? Yeah.
Participant: That’s both. So really it is down to packaging and things isn’t it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I mean my daughter will take stuff to the bottle bank because it’s en route for her to do that. But it’s not on everybody’s route to take things to the bottle bank, you know, why can’t they have a bottle bank on street corners?
Interviewer: So you feel like if it was more convenient for people…
Participant: I think so, yeah.
Interviewer: …they would be more willing to engage and…?
Participant: People would be more, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, for example, you know, economic factors and health issues and things like that, how important are the environmental issues to you, you know, compared to these other issues?
Participant: Well I think that they are important and it depends what, sort of what you’re talking about really. I mean I’m sort of quite concerned about the bee population. I have a couple of bee hotels in my garden but nobody can give me a straight answer as to why the bee population is in decline. Is it the use of pesticides? Are we planting things that don’t attract the bees? Are they being attacked by some other predator? I mean the bees pollinate everything, without the bees we’re really stuck.
Interviewer: So what would you say is more important between health and the environment?
Participant: What would I say is more important?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Again you’re going to have to sort of give me example of what you mean really?
Interviewer: Just sort of like in general in society, you know, there’s always, maybe the economy is a better example but there’s always quite a lot going on with the economy and things like that, social riots, I just wondered, you know, if you rate these kind of issues as being similar in importance or maybe economic factors are more important to you?
Interviewer: It is quite a hard question so don’t worry.
Participant: Yeah, it is, it’s a hard question. I’m, um, find that quite difficult to answer really. For me personally what, you know, what is more important for me are things like landfill, what we do with our waste and the food that we grow, those are the issues that I am more interested in personally.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s great, thank you. Yeah, it is quite a difficult question. Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Would you like to improve that?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: Why do you feel like you don’t know enough?
Participant: Because I think sort of doing this diary perhaps has made me think about other things and then I think “well actually I don’t know too much about that” so…
Interviewer: What kind of other things?
Participant: Oh dear me! I suppose an example might be what do Tesco do with these carrier bags that they take back, you know?
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s a good example. Do you have any other examples?
Participant: Why is your carrier bag free in the local corner shop?
Interviewer: [Laughs] Yeah.
Participant: I may have to take that onboard and find out why and I’ll let you know!
Interviewer: So now you’ve started to think more in-depth about your behaviours you then realise that maybe there is room for a bit more…
Participant: There is more to learn.
Interviewer: …information?
Participant: Yeah. There is definitely more to learn, yeah. And I think children need to be educated more at school, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: No not really, no. Because like I say…
Interviewer: From the government or environmental organisations?
Participant: Well I suppose it’s a mixture of the two. I mean I would like to see bottle banks on street corners. I mean, you know, why, is that a government issue or is that an environment, it’s an environmental issue but who is responsible for that?
Interviewer: So there’s more that could be done?
Participant: Is it the Council, yeah, is it the local Council that need to do it or does it need to come from government to do it? So there’s, I think, yeah, I think there’s more that can be done but that’s just one thing that springs to mind because it’s a job that my daughter does. Because if you want to be, you know, if you want to try and be a little more environmentally friendly you have to think about, there’s no point getting in your car and driving five miles to your bottle bank really because it’s not very environmentally friendly to be driving five miles is it?
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s a good point.
Participant: You know, so if you’re driving five miles there and back to dispose of a couple of jam jars, you’ve got to ask yourself “well is it really worth it?”
Interviewer: Do you feel like there’s enough communication on environmental issues?
Participant: Between who?
Interviewer: Just in general in society, again maybe from the government, environmental organisations, you know you’ve said you think a lot of people might be in shock that this charge is coming in so maybe that hasn’t been communicated well enough?
Participant: No. So I suppose the answer to that is no, I don’t think there is. But I think, again, you know, children at school being taught about these things go home and hopefully talk to their parents about it.
Interviewer: Are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: I think I’m possibly doing the best I can.
Interviewer: It sounds like you do do quite a bit?
Participant: But as with everything I think there’s always, you know, there’s always more that you can do, you know.
Interviewer: Okay. Is there anything you’d change in your environmental behaviours or not?
Participant: No. I don’t think so, no, not that I can think of.
Interviewer: If any, what are the main problems in your neighbourhood that you live in?
Interviewer: So maybe, you know, antisocial behaviour, litter, vandalism?
Participant: I would think public transport is a big issue.
Interviewer: The buses? Yeah.
Participant: In my area. I’m lucky, I’m fortunate I live in a nice area so there aren’t too many, we don’t really get, well my house actually backs onto woods, onto ancient woodland, it’s becoming a bit of an issue with kids hanging around and drugs which is a bit of a worry because you think “oh is that going to escalate?” Kids will be kids, I know that, so is that going to escalate? So I suppose policing of, I mean I can see that situation sort of getting out, a bit out of hand really with the kids. But who knows, I mean kids can get bored and just move on and do other things can’t they, you know? But I think the main thing and it is also environmentally is the public transport, the lack of it.
Interviewer: Okay.