Interviewer: Well thank you very much for taking part in the diary study.
Participant: That’s alright.
Interviewer: So it’s just sort of an hour to speak of your experiences of the diary study and some of the questions we’ve already touched upon in the diary, yeah, just so you tell us a bit more really.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: So there are no good or bad answers, we just want to know about your daily routine and just answer, you know, honestly.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Could you tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: I think because we only do shopping once a week it was quite difficult to answer the questions every day because they weren’t all relevant to us as such and some of the things like saying the waste and things that you use, the answers that I was giving, as you can see probably from the answers in my diary, were pretty much the same as the day before really so it was quite... I don’t know whether it needed to be a bit more specific or whether I wasn’t answering it correctly, I don’t know, I just felt like I was just repeating myself every day really.
Interviewer: Well if you were doing the same things, you know, a similar daily routine each day then that’s kind of to be expected isn’t it?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: To have the same sort of answers, that’s fine. Was there anything that was tedious to write down?
Participant: I think where it asked you about your waste, even though you know you’re doing the study and you know the kind of things that you do throw away, without keeping them all on the side each day and writing it down, I don’t know, do you want to know the exact thing down to a teabag or is it, it was difficult to know whether you literally write every single thing down that you throw in the bin or you just wanted a general idea of what kind of things you’re throwing away and recycling.
Interviewer: So maybe a bit more direction would have been helpful.
Participant: Yeah, maybe.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you about filling the diary?
Participant: No, I don’t think so.
Interviewer: Could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Well I’ve not... we do it all online so I’ve not actually done any shopping in a supermarket which again was difficult because it said, I think the first question was have you done any food shopping? So you answer “Yes”, because you have done food shopping but then it asks you about your actual shopping in the shop so I think maybe it should maybe come up and say, because I have done food shopping but it didn’t specify at that point, “Have you been to a supermarket to do your food shopping?” So then the next questions aren’t really relevant to people that have done online shopping.
Interviewer: So maybe it could have said, you know, “Have you done this online?” And then had a different set of questions for people who had done their shopping online.
Participant: Yeah, because I think in the next set, if you say “No, you haven’t done any shopping”, your next set of questions it says “Have you done any online shopping in there?” So it could almost do with “Have you done any shopping in a supermarket?” “Yes”, “Have you done any shopping online?” “Yes”, and then different questions because when it’s asking you about the carrier bags and things like that obviously I haven’t taken a bag for life because I’ve not been to the supermarket myself.
Interviewer: Okay, so how many times like a week or a month do you do your shop, your big shop?
Participant: Every Sunday.
Interviewer: Every week?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what stores do you use to buy your food?
Participant: Mainly Tesco but also if I get offers sent through from the other supermarkets, so Sainsbury’s, Waitrose, Ocado, Asda, so I’m not sort of loyal to one supermarket but it is mainly Tesco unless I get an offer through from somebody else.
Interviewer: Okay, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: My two children are quite fussy so we tend to have maybe ten meals on a rolling cycle so we’re pretty much creatures of habit really and a bit, probably a bit of a boring survey to look at because we tend to have the same things every week.
Interviewer: I don’t think there’s such a thing as a boring survey, it’s all useful, it’s all interesting. So what is important to you when choosing food and what is less important?
Participant: Health, I like to make sure that they’re having their fruit and vegetables. Price to a certain degree and we have just started doing the milk deliveries to help the local milkman so I wouldn’t say that the sort of ethics and things are our main priority but we do try to, you know, do things like that if we can but mainly it’s down to what they’ll eat and price...
Interviewer: And being healthy.
Participant: And healthy and then price really.
Interviewer: So do you also do like smaller, top up shops or is it literally just once a week?
Participant: In the time that I’ve done the survey we have only done the once a week supermarket shop but sometimes I will go down to the local butchers or the market to get the fruit and veg but I haven’t done in the time that I’ve done the survey.
Interviewer: It sounds like you’re quite well organised with it all.
Participant: Well it’s just that we were getting to the stage where we were not doing a weekly shop and we were going to the shop every day and it worked out quite expensive to do it that way because you don’t just go and buy your meal for the day, you end up with all sorts of extras and just with having a one year old as well it’s a lot easier just to get it delivered when they’re in bed and not have them trailing behind as well.
Interviewer: So when you go to the, like when you on occasion do go to the butchers or wherever, how do you normally travel to that store?
Participant: Either walking or in the car.
Interviewer: Is that dependent on anything in particular or?
Participant: Weather really, if it’s raining I would always go in the car because it’s not very nice when you’ve got a baby as well but it’s not too far, it’s about a mile and a half from where we live so it’s too bad to walk.
Interviewer: And do you tend to go by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Usually one of the children or both of them.
Interviewer: How much of your food goes to waste every week, kind of approximately?
Participant: Since I’ve been doing the weekly shop, not very much, I think.
Interviewer: So I’ll ask then if you were going on smaller shops more frequently.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, that kind of surprised me really because I thought if you’re not perhaps knowing what you’re going to eat a day, you might end up with more wastage but actually very little we’ve thrown away since we’ve been doing it weekly rather than doing it daily, you tend to be a bit more, I don’t know, maybe a bit more piggy and buy a bit more than you need and then end up throwing more away.
Interviewer: Yeah, especially if you’re hungry when you’re shopping I find.
Participant: Yeah. But also it depends for me week by week as well because my partner works away so seven days, some weeks he might be here for the whole week and then other weeks he might be here for one day or here for three days, we don’t know week by week, we find out what he’s going to do for that week.
Interviewer: And when you do your online shop is that normally you by yourself kind of doing the shopping?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Could you tell me in about five words or expressions sort of what comes to your mind when you hear plastic bag?
Participant: They’re going to start charging us 5p for them if we’re not careful.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: We do have lots of bags for life but I always forget to take them if we go out, I have to admit but I think perhaps now if they’re going to start charging us for them it might make us remember a bit more, but we do reuse them for things whether it’s putting nappies in or, you know, the little bins in the bathroom, things like that, we do use them for that, we don’t just throw them away but no, we are a bit bad for that unfortunately.
Interviewer: So the main thing that comes to your mind is the plastic bag charge.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Kind of like you do reuse bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, anything else or are those kind of the main things that you think of?
Participant: Yeah, they’re the main things.
Interviewer: Do you remember a time when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time possibly?
Participant: No, I don’t think I do, I remember going, my mum always used to do a monthly shop so we always went with them but at that time they had those massive bags that you used to put, you sort of hang over one side of the trolley and you put all your stuff in and then unpack it, so they had reusable bags then. No, I can’t, I don’t know, I can’t really remember the first time, it’s not stuck in my memory anyway.
Interviewer: The next question I was going to ask is what types of bags or containers you normally use to pack your shopping? I’m just curious to know if you do it online, do they come already in plastic bags then when you do your Tesco shop?
Participant: Yeah, you can, there’s an option to come with no bags but then obviously you’ve got to, they come usually with about four or five crates of food so you’ve then got to unpack it all while they’re standing on your doorstep, so I tend not to do that but I have just had an email from them today to say that if you do use the bags they’re going to start charging you again so that maybe something that we might consider doing, it just means that it’s longer unpacking it at the door.
Interviewer: Yeah, is it the unpacking that kind of bothers you or is it the person sort of stood in the doorway waiting or?
Participant: Yeah, I think the person stood there really.
Interviewer: Yeah, I can imagine it’s a bit uncomfortable.
Participant: Yeah, you’re rushing a bit anyway when they bring it in bags but yeah, I think there maybe should be, I don’t really know how you could get around that with online shopping because there’s no other way of doing it apart from unpacking it like that.
Interviewer: What about when you go like the butchers you mentioned for example, you know, if on the odd occasion you’ve forgotten to get milk or something?
Participant: If it’s just one item than I wouldn’t tend to get a bag but if I’m getting a few items I would because I’m usually carrying Jacob as well so trying to carry the items and a baby is quite hard if you’re forgotten your bags as well.
Interviewer: Would that be your bag that you’d have on you or one that you’d buy?
Participant: Well one that they give you at the minute but they’re disposable carriers.
Interviewer: You would be buying later on potentially with this charge?
Participant: Yeah, if I don’t, I think it will make me think a bit more if you’ve having these 5p’s every time you go to the shop, maybe one of those little bags that you can stick in your handbag or something.
Interviewer: So in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in the stores?
Participant: I think it’s just something that you’ll get used to because we went over to Ireland when that first switched to charging for the carrier bags and it was quite alien to us really but for them they’d got used to it so I think it’s just laziness really, I don’t think it is really that important, it’s just laziness on behalf of the shopper.
Interviewer: Okay, so what if plastic bags completely disappeared from all stores, how would you find that?
Participant: I’d probably end up with about 300 bags for life in my house, well we’ve got quite a few already but yeah. No, I don’t think we could get rid of them completely, I don’t know, maybe they will eventually but I think that would be quite difficult, you’d have to put it in your trolley and take the trolley to the car wouldn’t you?
Interviewer: Yeah, I suppose yeah.
Participant: Then there would always be the bags for life, they would have to sell those wouldn’t they?
Interviewer: Okay, so you mentioned reusing bags to put nappies in and things like that and using them as bin liners, are those like just the thin, single use bags or bags for life?
Participant: No, just the single use ones.
Interviewer: Okay, do you know roughly how many plastic bags you currently have at home?
Participant: What the reusable ones, ah, the disposable ones?
Interviewer: And bags for life.
Participant: I would say we’ve probably got about 40 disposable ones and maybe 20 bags for life.
Interviewer: Are there any other things that you use bags for?
Participant: Toy Storage, we usually use a bag for life or you know, you can get the ones with the characters on and Tesco do them, I’m a bit of a sucker for those, we’ve got quite a few with the kids characters on for storing their toys in, yeah, I think that’s really, oh and clothes that I’d use for the kids’ clothes that are too small, I tend to store those in there as well.
Interviewer: So you’ve mentioned about the plastic bag charge already so you’re aware of what it is.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s a good idea, I think it will either encourage you to spend an extra 5p and get one of those, the plastic bags for life or remind you to bring your own bags, I think it’s a good idea.
Interviewer: Do you find its introduction quite surprising?
Participant: Yeah, the first I knew about it was I nipped in to the Co-op on the way home tonight and they had a sign up in there, that was the first that I’ve heard of it.
Interviewer: Oh wow, so literally today?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: You found out that it’s coming to England in October.
Participant: Yeah, and I’ve had an email today as well so I don’t know whether it’s been out, been on the news and things and I’ve just not seen it or I don’t know, just coincidence that I’ve just seen it today.
Interviewer: Well that’s quite interesting then because it’s quite new, sort of fresh in your mind.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of this charge that they’re bringing in?
Participant: To make people reuse the bags so they’re not having to keep making them, so the environment really I would think.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you think the charge will be successful in doing that?
Participant: I would think over time but like I say, people will just get used to it and it will be one of those everyday things that everybody does, they’ll have their bags for life with them when they go shopping, perhaps not so much in like your little shops but I would think when you go and do your bigger shops it will be successful but then there’s still going to be people that will buy those bags I think.
Interviewer: So how would you think or well do you think the introduction of the 5p plastic bag charge will affect you or not?
Participant: No, I don’t think I would lose any sleep over 5p if I forgot to bring my bag with me.
Interviewer: So you don’t think it will change the bags that you use or maybe with your online shopping it wouldn’t encourage you to maybe pick the option to not have it come in the bags or?
Participant: Yes, I think I will probably will for my weekly shop, I think it will make me not want to pay it because it’s a lot I suppose over a year that adds up to quite a lot of money doesn’t it? But just say, if you’re just nipping in for a couple of things, I would like to think that I would remember all the time but I certainly wouldn’t get to the checkout, realise I hadn’t got my bags and go out to the car and get my bags for the sake of 5p.
Interviewer: Yeah, which is understandable.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think the charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: I suppose if I do it even on my weekly shop I don’t use the bags than have saved, I don’t know, I’m trying to think how many bags I got yesterday, maybe ten bags so I suppose that’s ten bags that haven’t had to be made isn’t it? So I suppose without thinking about it you are really.
Interviewer: Okay, so you don’t think it would consciously make you, you know, adopt like a pro-environmental identity or something?
Participant: No, I don’t think so.
Interviewer: Okay. Sorry if I’m sniffing a bit, I have a bit of a cold.
Participant: Oh no.
Interviewer: Do you think that there will be any other changes after the introduction of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: What in supermarkets or in general?
Interviewer: Kind of in general, well both really, maybe I don’t know, the introduction of other charges or things to do with this specific charge, anything really.
Participant: Yeah, I think because it’s always a big thing the environmental issues isn’t it? I can’t think of any specific things that might change but I think the environment is just something that’s always going to be a hot topic that they’re trying to encourage people to make things better really, yeah, I can’t think of anything specific but.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: No, I don’t think just having a sign up as you enter a supermarket saying “Have you remembered your bags is enough to sort of advertise it really, I don’t know, actually...
Interviewer: Do you think, carry on.
Participant: Unless you’re actually in the supermarket I think by that point it’s too late really because if you’ve not got the bags in your car than, yeah, I think it’s just something you’ve got to get into peoples’ mindset to make them think I’m going shopping, I need my bags, I don’t know, without stopping the bags altogether I don’t see how you can do that really.
Interviewer: So you do think that that should be changed, it should be more encouraged or?
Participant: Yeah, I definitely think you should because I’m all for buying the bags and then just forget to take them, there’s nothing that makes me just remember to do it, I don’t...
Interviewer: So you’d like to be reminded more than anything?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, but not when you’re in the doorway of the supermarket.
Participant: Yeah, it’s too late by then isn’t it really?
Interviewer: Yeah, and then it just kind of makes you feel bad.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So when the 5p charge comes into effect in England, they’ll be some types of bags and some types of shops where the charge won’t apply so for smaller shops, for example, they won’t have to charge for their bags whereas bigger shops will, do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: Are we talking food shops or just shops in general?
Interviewer: All shops.
Participant: Well I would still expect if I went into, I don’t know, Next, and you’re going in to buy yourself a top for £30, I would expect a carrier bag for that.
Interviewer: So is it to do with the brand or the price?
Participant: I think the money that you’re spending really, it’s like you wouldn’t go into a designer shop and come out and put it in your Asda bag for life would you?
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s kind of like if you’ve bought something quite nice and expensive you almost want that on the bag so that people can see maybe?
Participant: No, not necessarily that you’ve got it on the bag itself, just that you wouldn’t want to... I just think clothes in general, whether you bought it from Primark or, I don’t know, some designer shop somewhere you wouldn’t want to put clothes in a bag for life, I don’t know, you just sort of associate bags for life with your food shopping.
Interviewer: Oh okay, so it’s not the specific shop, it’s just clothes in general?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think, so am I right in saying you don’t think it’s unfair necessarily that smaller shops won’t have to charge but bigger shops will but you think it’s unfair that clothes shops will have to charge?
Participant: Yeah, I think so because you wouldn’t, if you went in and bought a pint of milk than you could just come out with that pint of milk in your hand, if you went into a shop and bought a t-shirt you wouldn’t want to come out holding a t-shirt in your hand would you?
Interviewer: No.
Participant: But I don’t know it just seems...
Interviewer: Yeah, I know what you mean.
Participant: Something different, there’s something different about it, so it’s not necessarily the shop, I think all food shops should charge, if you’re going to have Tesco charging than the corner shop should charge if they have to but just for other things I just think it’s different.
Interviewer: Okay, how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as the congestion charge that they have in big cities?
Participant: I don’t really know what those charges are to be honest, I’ve never driven into London or anywhere so I wouldn’t know what, how much it was.
Interviewer: So yeah, it’s just charging people to drive into busy areas or other examples of, you know, if they were to charge plastic bottles or plastic packaging or individually wrapped vegetables.
Participant: What you mean not necessarily the difference in cost but just the fact that they are charging it?
Interviewer: Yeah, like would you think that the plastic bag charge was similar to the, you know, to these other different types of charges?
Participant: Well it’s aiming towards the same goal isn’t it, to save the environment really, so yeah I think it is similar.
Interviewer: So if they were going to introduce, for example, a charge on plastic bottles do you think that you would support that?
Participant: What, so if you were buying a bottle of water you would be charged for the bottle that it was in?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t really see how that can work if you’re then expected to recycle it as well.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay.
Participant: So a plastic bag you’re physically getting something aren’t you?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Whereas with a plastic bottle you can’t get the water without the bottle unless they’re going to refund you if you take the bottle back like they used to do with the glass bottles didn’t they?
Interviewer: Okay. What do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag introduction?
Participant: I would hope that more people would be using their bags for life in that scale of time, I don’t know, I can’t think of anything else, it might probably would have gone up to 10p rather than 5p with inflation. No, I can’t really think of anything else that might have happened.
Interviewer: So do you think people would be more likely to use bags for life rather than like bringing like a rucksack or a canvas bag or something?
Participant: I suppose it depends on the individual person because I suppose really if I was walking with Jacob I could put stuff under my pram and stuff like that and so I suppose it depends, I can’t imagine people going out with rucksacks and doing their weekly shopping filling that up.
Interviewer: So more the plastic bags for life?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, do you save water at home?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And do you save energy at home?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Bottles, we do, the kids will have refillable bottles of water to take to school and things like that. I quite often send things into school, you know, for modelling and things like that and Grace will make, my daughter will make things out of, you know, birthday cards, she’ll cut the pictures off the front and things like that. And the carrier bags, we use those, I’m trying to think, shredded paper I’ll often do for the rabbit, for his bed. I’m trying to think what else, that’s all I can think of at the moment, I’m sure we reuse more than that, that doesn’t sound like a lot really does it?
Interviewer: It does, it sounds like a fair bit, quite creative uses for different things, drink, the rabbit. Do you ever look at packaging in supermarkets?
Participant: What, the actual amount of packaging or what’s on it or?
Interviewer: Either, both.
Participant: Yeah, yeah I do often, I like the red, green and amber codes that they use now for the quantities of things in there.
Interviewer: Yeah, for the helpings.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what about the amount of packaging?
Participant: Yeah, I mean some things you look at them and you think, like the bananas that they package in the wrapper, I don’t quite understand why they need to do that, so yeah, I think some things I would look at, like I would never buy those, I would buy the bananas just as they are, so I think that does make me think a bit more about what you’re buying.
Interviewer: So it’s more if something is already over packaged you look at it and think oh, that’s a bit strange.
Participant: Yeah, I mean obviously it’s a bit more difficult when you’re doing it online because you can’t necessarily see, like yesterday I ordered, I thought I’d ordered six bananas and I ended up with one, so it’s a bit, well because I looked on last week’s order and clicked on it and I thought it had ordered the same amount but it only sent me one so it’s a bit more difficult online because you don’t always see the exact packet that you receive.
Interviewer: Yeah, of course. Do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yeah, we have to here.
Interviewer: What kind of things?
Participant: We can do pretty much anything apart from the black plastic and we don’t do food waste either.
Interviewer: Okay, is that more of a habit or do you have to plan to recycle?
Participant: No, it’s just a habit now really because we’ve had it for so long, well since I first moved into the house on my own we’ve had it so it’s just something that we’ve always done really and the kids like doing it now as well, they know which bins to put the things in so that makes it a bit easier.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: So do you tend to save car trips or not?
Participant: Do I tend to what, sorry?
Interviewer: Save car trips.
Participant: Save them, in?
Interviewer: Yeah, so I guess, I don’t know if you needed to drive to two places that were close you would do it at once rather than...
Participant: Well generally the reason that I have to drive is because I start work at quarter past nine and the children start school at nine so I have to get one to school, one to nursery and get to work for quarter past nine and then I just come back so that’s the only place that I’m really going, just school, nursery, work.
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Yeah, I like to think so, I’ve got the arrows on my car so it tells you when you have to change gear.
Interviewer: Oh that’s useful.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So is that a habit?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yeah, I get two days a week off so I try to make sure that we walk to school on those days.
Interviewer: Is that for health reasons or?
Participant: Health and money and the environment really, just both really, just to make sure that we’re getting out at least two days a week to go and walk.
Interviewer: Okay, do you buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What about organic food?
Participant: Yeah, I will buy organic food but not, again it’s down to if it’s on offer I’ll buy it, it’s not something that I specifically look out for to buy.
Interviewer: So the main reason you’d be buying it was if it was a good price?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy sustainable foods? So for example, foods that help to sustain animal welfare or forests, fisheries, things like that?
Participant: Eggs, I always make sure that I don’t get the like battery eggs and things like that but other than that I’m not very good on that unfortunately.
Interviewer: Is there a reason why you prefer free range eggs to other ones?
Participant: I think just the thought of the way that the chickens are treated really.
Interviewer: Do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: We pay for, I can never remember which one it is now, it’s one of the bird charities, I think it’s, oh it’s the Wildlife Trust, we donate to them every month and then they send like a kiddie magazine thing.
Interviewer: Oh I know, yeah, I know what you mean. So all of these behaviours I’ve just been talking about so saving water, energy, organic food, driving, things like that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during like the diary study?
Participant: What, notice that I would be more aware of them or?
Interviewer: Well yeah, just anything, has anything sort of surprised you or have you been thinking about anything or not really?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: I think just making sure what we do now is making the world a better place for my children really and grandchildren, I don’t think we probably do enough but again it’s down to time and money I think isn’t it everything? I know there are certain things that you can do without spending any money but some things certainly cost you more money to do things in an environmentally friendly way.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of things like that?
Participant: Your foods, I think.
Interviewer: So organic foods, things like that?
Participant: Yeah. And I find that quite often they go off quicker as well, yeah, and things like if you went for the solar panels which seem to be quite big at the moment, they’re just so expensive to install and yeah, I know it’s something that we certainly need to look at as a household really because I think recycling is probably one of the main things that we do, well we do do that and we do it well but that’s probably one of the few things that we do do for the environment really.
Interviewer: So how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Again, not as concerned as I should be, well obviously I am concerned but I know there’s a lot more things that we could be doing to help really.
Interviewer: So what does the environment mean to you? Is it an important part of your identity or not really?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t say so.
Interviewer: And it’s not really an important part of your life?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: But so it sounds like it’s more important to you when you’re thinking about your children.
Participant: And their future really, yeah.
Interviewer: So how concerned are you, if at all, about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I think we are quite good with that really, we don’t produce a massive amount of waste because we only have, we have a normal wheelie bin, a normal waste, we have a recycling wheelie bin and then we have a garden waste wheelie bin and they’re only collected every other week and we never, we never fill them so I don’t think that we produce an excess amount of waste.
Interviewer: Okay, so there’s not really anything to be concerned about then?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, you know, economic issues, social issues, things like that, how important, if at all, are the environmental issues to you?
Participant: They are important but I wouldn’t think that it shapes my life as such.
Interviewer: So with regard to other issues that are, you know, currently occurring, how important would you say the environment is?
Participant: Not very.
Interviewer: Okay. So do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, I think that is something that I need educating on more really.
Interviewer: Do you would like to know more do you think?
Participant: Yeah, I would say so.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I think, yeah I do but again it’s just down to, I think when you have small children everything just goes into them really and everything else just kind of, I don’t know, gets shoved to one side when it’s not affecting you directly at that point in time which I know is the wrong way to think about it, but I suppose over, as the years pass by things change don’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah. So do you feel that you receive enough support to be environmentally friendly or not? So from the government, environmental organisations?
Participant: Me personally, I wouldn’t say so but then also I’m not actively seeking any advice or, to perhaps do my bit.
Interviewer: So do you feel like you would maybe want more support or not really?
Participant: I mean it depends what it would be in really, I don’t know whether I would want people sort of, I don’t know, it’s difficult to say without knowing what specific thing you were talking about.
Interviewer: Do you think there’s enough communication about environmental issues on what people should be doing for the environment?
Participant: No, I don’t think there is really.
Interviewer: What else do you think could sort of be done to improve this lack of communication?
Participant: Um, I don’t know. I don’t know what, maybe the information is out there but, um, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Okay. So you mentioned before that you do, you’re obviously quite good with your recycling but you feel like there could be more that you could be doing, you mentioned that before, I just wondered what other things you feel like you could potentially be doing?
Participant: I think the, perhaps we drive more than we should but that’s more of a convenience thing than it’s trying to fit in the hours that I work and getting everybody where they need to be without having to spend more on nursery fees and having to put him in an extra day so that I can fill all the hours in, it’s not so much a lazy thing, it’s just you can’t get to the three different places in the timescale that there is. I think we could, like you said about the water, we could do the water butt in the garden, we could do the compost heap, so there are certainly other things that we could do but we’ve not long moved into this house so it’s just trying to get the inside done before you start thinking about the outside really.
Interviewer: So do you think these are things that you would maybe like to change in your behaviours or not really?
Participant: Yeah, I think we would like to do those things but again mainly for us it is just down to time because, like I say, most of the time my partner’s away so it’s just me with the children so just trying to get about your normal day-to-day things without worrying about extra things on top of that is hard enough in itself really.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely. What are the main problems, if any, in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Again it’s quite boring really because we’re a tiny county, we’re the smallest county in England so crime is very low, Council Tax is very high, I’d say that was quite a problem for a lot of people but I think really we do most things that, like the recycling is really good, you just chuck everything into the one bin so we can’t moan about that. We feel safe here.
Interviewer: Okay, well no problems then really?
Participant: No. I certainly wouldn’t move ever.
Interviewer: Well that’s good. Is there anything that you kind of want to add or sort of talk about that maybe I haven’t mentioned?
Participant: Um, no, I think we’ve discussed everything really.
Interviewer: Okay. Let me just going to ask you some demographic questions now then.
Participant: [Asks demographic questions].
Interviewer: So that’s pretty much everything for the interview, you’ve been invited to take part in the second phase which is in November and that’s the one with the £70 payment and the prize draw, did you want to take part in that?
Participant: Yes please, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, great, so we’ll be in touch at the beginning of November then, we’ll contact you and get that all arranged.
Participant: Is that the same questions again or is it different questions?
Interviewer: I’m not sure actually if it’s the same questions, I can go and check quickly if you want.
Participant: Oh no, no, it’s fine, I just wondered, no it’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, I don’t know if they might make some alterations based on some feedback.
Participant: No, I don’t know whether it was just me that found that but I just thought that if you do online shopping it’s not really relevant to you some of the questions.
Interviewer: Yeah, well I’ll mention it and maybe it will be a bit different and if, yeah and if not, maybe we could contact you and, I don’t know, arrange an easier way for you to sort of fill it in.
Participant: Yeah, because I mean some weeks it would be that we wouldn’t do an online shop but it just so happens that on these two weeks we did.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah well I’ll definitely mention it.
Participant: Okay.