Interviewer: Is how you found the diary experience overall, what did you think about it?
Participant: It made me really think about what I was doing which was good but sometimes I felt guilty because some of the questions that obviously came up on the form I realised that I wasn’t, you know, I wasn’t ticking off but yeah, I think it was thought provoking.
Interviewer: Was there anything that you liked in it and on the opposite side something that you found more difficult?
Participant: I think the question about buying things locally, which I wish I did, but I don’t, even though I might try to, and also about packaging, buying things with less packaging because I am, my motivation is price rather than, yeah, I’m motivated by price basically.
Interviewer: Was there anything that was difficult to write down or not?
Participant: No, no, I felt I could be quite honest.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you in the diary at all?
Participant: I knew this at some level but I became very, very aware of how much packaging there was around fruit, vegetable and salad items which I buy a lot.
Interviewer: But it’s something that you haven’t necessarily noticed before?
Participant: I think it was, it was almost like at the back of the mind but I didn’t, I think the [?? 1:59] diary highlighted it and made me very conscious of it.
Interviewer: Has that, you know led to any kind of changes in what you are doing or not?
Participant: Yeah, slightly, there’s more of a local shop and I bought lettuce and some items from there the other day and you can just put things in their own bags so I thought that was better actually, yeah.
Interviewer: Is there anything else that you would like to add about the diary before we move onto?
Participant: I guess the repetition because I know there are certain things, like for example, I don’t have a car, I don’t print things off because I don’t have a printer so sometimes it felt a bit repetitive and I’ve got a fairly standard routine so the repetition was a bit boring but I understand that I’m not like everybody else and routines change so it’s good to get a, you know, a view across a week or so.
Interviewer: The next thing maybe I wanted to ask you about is how your typical food shopping trip looks like.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: If you could describe that please.
Participant: I don’t think I have one, that’s the problem with me, it’s very random and sort of as and when and I might do, I think prior to you, prior to the diary, I might have done a big shop, occasionally I would do an online delivery, very occasionally if there’s a special offer but I’m led by, I’ve got no pattern, you know some people shop like they do a big shop on a Friday night/Saturday morning, I don’t do that, I shop as and when and depending on how many people are coming to visit and how many people I need to feed.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how many times a week or a month do you go to buy food?
Participant: I would say every, I’d say on average every other day.
Interviewer: So do you tend to buy small quantities usually?
Participant: Yes, what will happen is I think I might buy one really big quantity of like heavy produce, like rice, tins, and then I will top up every other day on things like fresh produce like meat. Like I went to a fishmonger on Monday and, you know fruit and vegetable, salad, so yeah, I do a sort of topping up shop with maybe something else interspersed in between that with a few, maybe a few tins.
Interviewer: Actually, yeah, so how many main shops would you do a week or maybe a month if that’s easier?
Participant: Yeah, although I wouldn’t do a main shop weekly, I’d probably do like one a month.
Interviewer: And how many top up... oh yeah, then you said the top up shops would be very frequent.
Participant: Yeah, every other day if not more, I wouldn’t say every day but I’d say definitely every other day, sort of five out of seven I would say.
Interviewer: And is there a reason for, you know, for doing shopping in this kind of way, you know, more frequently?
Participant: Well partly because I can be more flexible about what I eat, I don’t have a car so I don’t tend to bulk buy, I don’t have a freezer, so I don’t freeze food and then re-use it. Also I like to shop spontaneously, does that make sense? Like I just like to see, like I really like my local, the local store where I live will do vegetables and salad and fruit items at a reduced price so I just like to react to what’s there rather than being really specific, so yeah, it’s transport, it’s cost, it’s flexibility and it’s because I don’t stick to a particular routine. And also I don’t particularly like shopping in a big supermarket, I like being able to go in and quickly look round but I like variety but not too big.
Interviewer: When you go shopping how does it happen usually, do you go on purpose or do you drop buy doing something else?
Participant: It’s a combination of both so some days I know that I haven’t got key items, like I haven’t got meat, I haven’t got fish, I haven’t got pasta and then other times I’ll be walking past a shop and I’ll see something that grabs my interest or they will be a special offer or I just think, “Oh well, I’ll pop in there because I’m here”. So I do both, I do sort of vaguely planned but also with again spontaneous shop, and it tends to be dictated by when I’ve been, like because I live near a train station so when I get off the train, when I’m walking past my local shop I might pop in just to see what they’ve got or what’s on offer outside.
Interviewer: Do you travel to shop by walk or you know to any kind of food shops, is it by walk or by public transport?
Participant: It’s always walking.
Interviewer: Walking all of it?
Participant: Yeah. Occasionally, very occasionally it’s train, like on Monday I was near a train station, I went to Sainsbury’s and got the train back, so that happens like once every month I’d say.
Interviewer: And do you go food shopping on your own or with someone?
Participant: Generally by myself, occasionally one of my children might come if they’re here because they spend time with their father and me so it varies. I’d say 90, say 80% of the time myself.
Interviewer: And when you go to buy food with someone is it someone who lives in your household or is it just, you know, like...
Participant: Yeah, they live here part-time.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate who will buy what in this case?
Participant: I tend to buy the basic main supplies and my son or daughter will tend to choose like the treats or something they’re particularly interested in because they’re teenagers.
Interviewer: Sure. And would you say that there is any amount of, you know, waste that is created from the food that you buy in terms of, I mean something that’s gone past the date or something that hasn’t been used?
Participant: Not often, occasionally, but I don’t know how to quantify it but not, not very often.
Interviewer: And what is it when this happens, what kind of?
Participant: Well tomatoes going slightly off maybe, or carrots, I’m just trying to think, lettuce, yeah, so salady items, that’s the main thing.
Interviewer: And these kind of things, yeah. The next thing I wanted to ask you about is the following, when you hear about supermarket plastic bag, what does it make you think of? If you could tell me maybe like five words that come up to your mind regarding this?
Participant: Waste, cost, recycle, litter, useful. I’ve got really mixed feelings towards plastic bags.
Interviewer: And what is mixed?
Participant: Because they can be recycled and used for other things like other rubbish or putting things in and you can reuse them. I sometimes use them for my, I’ve got a dog, so I use them for litter bags for my dog, and also they’re sometimes really handy and sometimes I put them in my main like rucksack as like additional help. So yeah, very mixed feelings because it’s good because you can reuse them but it’s.
Interviewer: But it’s then?
Participant: Yeah, it’s, yeah I’m aware that the impact that they might have, when I see them floating round local streets and on the grass then I think “Oh it’s so ugly, they’re horrible”.
Interviewer: Do you remember the point in your life when you came across supermarket bags for the first time?
Participant: Probably in the 1970s, yeah, with my parents.
Interviewer: And what it was like at the moment you have those plastic bags?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: What it was like at that moment to have those plastic bags?
Participant: I didn’t really think about it, it was just part of the way things were, yeah, I wasn’t conscious at all.
Interviewer: Do you remember if these bags were free or...
Participant: They were free, definitely.
Interviewer: They were free, yeah. And before that do you remember the situation before when there were no bags at all yet or not? I don’t know if that was your generation or not.
Participant: No, to be honest I can’t remember that, I do remember people with trolleys, maybe my mum, I do remember shopping trolleys but I can’t say it was totally my generation, so.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags do you currently use when you go shopping?
Participant: I tend to use a rucksack, so a backpack, and sometimes a trolley and other reusable sorts of bags, you know, made out of cotton or hessian or something.
Interviewer: Yeah, and does it ever happen to you to take supermarket plastic bags, or you know, any free bags?
Participant: Yeah, it does, I get annoyed with myself when it happens because I wish I’d thought because sometimes if it just really happens that I’m caught by surprise and I think I have to buy something so it does occasionally.
Interviewer: And why do you uncomfortable about it?
Participant: Because I think it’s a waste.
Interviewer: But then if you reuse them at home?
Participant: Yeah, so it’s I try not to but I think when I get past a certain level of carrier bags at home, I think “Oh well I shouldn’t be doing this anymore”.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, absolutely. And you know when you, what kind of situations are these when you forget to bring or maybe... no, sorry, what kind of situations are these when you need to take the supermarket bags?
Participant: When I have gone somewhere unexpectedly and I’m near a supermarket or a shop, it could be a fishmonger or a butcher and I think “Oh actually, yeah, that looks nice, I’ll get that”, and then I haven’t planned to buy then I think “Yeah, I should”, so you know, I’m glad just to use my bag.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to forget your own bags at home or not have anything on you?
Participant: Not that often.
Interviewer: And how do you plan on taking your bags, you know, each time you go to shop?
Participant: So I always take a fairly large sort of reusable bag with little smaller bags inside and if I know I’m going for something a bit more substantial, I’ll take a rucksack but I generally always walk round with quite a sizeable bag.
Interviewer: And do you have any Bags for Life at home at the moment?
Participant: I do, yeah.
Interviewer: And any thinner plastic bags, any many of those do you have right now?
Participant: The Bags for Life?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: About three.
Interviewer: About three of those, yeah, and thinner plastic, you know, single use bags?
Participant: Actually I’ve probably got five Bags for Life, so I think I’ve got a couple of Waitrose ones and some Tesco and the thinner ones I’ve got a couple of charity ones so about, yeah, five and three.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And you know what do you think about Bags for Life compared to the normal thin plastic bags?
Participant: They’re obviously more substantial because I’ve been in situations where thinner bags have broken and things have cut through and, you know, have cut my legs. They’re not as malleable so they don’t, they’re not flexible but they’re, you know, they’re very sturdy so you can carry much heavier things in them.
Interviewer: So why do you think Bags for Life have been given this name?
Participant: I think to try and encourage people to stop using carrier bags and just use what they have, to just keep repeating use.
Interviewer: Do you think the current use of Bags for Life matches its name?
Participant: Not totally, no.
Interviewer: Why do you say so?
Participant: Because I think people have good intentions and they buy them or they buy them spontaneously but then I think some people, sometimes, including myself, but you know might just come out and then not, they don’t necessarily take the Bag for Life with them so.
Interviewer: Yeah, so what do you think people do with those Bags for Life?
Participant: They just get stored, they just get hoarded away.
Interviewer: Yeah. Where do you store your bags that you take shopping with you?
Participant: I have, I put them in a rucksack or in, I’ve got another bag, a big shoulder bag that I use or I’ve got a bag that I put, you know, recycled bags in.
Interviewer: And for you how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores at all? What happened if they completely disappeared, so if they were completely gone from the shops?
Participant: I think initially it would be inconvenient but I remember, I think Aldi and Lidl initially didn’t have them, I’m sure I remember that and they only had boxes or you had to take your own bag and that was a shock but you get used to it, so yeah, I think you could cope with it.
Interviewer: So it wouldn’t be a major problem?
Participant: No, it wouldn’t for me actually, no.
Interviewer: I think this is it that I wanted to ask about the plastic bags so just moving on.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: The next part which, you know, talks about plastic bag charge, do you know what is plastic bag charge?
Participant: I know, I think in Wales, is it something like 2 or 5p? And I know they charge in Ireland.
Interviewer: And in what kind of context have you heard about this charge for the first time?
Participant: I heard it on the news, I think it was a government initiative and then I experienced it when I went to Wales and to Ireland.
Interviewer: And when did you hear about this for the first time?
Participant: About six years ago.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this charge, especially as you have experienced it at some point?
Participant: I found it annoying but I understand it.
Interviewer: Yeah, and why is it annoying?
Participant: I’m annoyed at myself for not bringing bags out, so that I’m having to pay for something I’ve already got but I think the more I do it, the more I have to do it, the more I will remember.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that plastic bag charge, you know, came to effect in other places in the UK?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I think it’s something that should be done generally.
Interviewer: Why do you think it’s, you know, it should be done?
Participant: Because I think it makes people think about what they’re doing.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, so would they stop it? Would they stop themselves from taking more bags?
Participant: Yeah, I think it would be a preventative measure.
Interviewer: And basically what is good in your opinion about the plastic bag charge and what is not as good?
Participant: So it makes people think, it makes people take preventative measures, it stops, you know, you can be just really lazy which I know I can be. Not so good is it’s irritating to pay for something that you’ve got, but that, no, I don’t really, that’s about it really.
Interviewer: Yeah sure. And did you know that the plastic bag charge is coming to effect in England next month?
Participant: I didn’t realise it was that soon.
Interviewer: And did you hear about it before that it’s going to come?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, you haven’t?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s the first time you hear, yeah. What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge? I know I think we spoke about this earlier on but?
Participant: Yeah, I’m concerned it’s a way of clawing back, yeah, I suppose I want to know if it’s general money for the government than that doesn’t please me but if the money, if the money is specifically is reused for recycling and energy efficiency projects than that’s fine.
Interviewer: Do you think personally it will have any effect on the environment, both urban and natural at all or not?
Participant: I would like to think so, I can be a bit cynical but I would like to think so, yeah.
Interviewer: And what, you know, if you were a bit cynical, you know, why wouldn’t it, I mean, yeah, why would you be a little bit cynical about it, what are the reasons?
Participant: That people don’t take this seriously, there’s other major things going on with the environment that are out of individuals’ control and that some people just don’t care basically, they’d rather spend the money and have the convenience.
Interviewer: Do you think the introduction of the plastic bag charge will affect you personally when, you know, it comes in?
Participant: I think I will hopefully be more organised, I would plan to be more organised.
Interviewer: How would you organise yourself better than you currently are?
Participant: Sometimes I do go out without a proper bag just because I want to go for a quick walk, I’m taking my dog and I think “Oh I don’t want the responsibility of a bag and I’m not planning to buy anything”, and then I’ll come across something so I think it would make me think, you know, I might as well just, better safe than sorry, oh yeah, I’ll just take a little... I’ll take a bag with a recycling bag inside it.
Interviewer: And do you think it’s likely to change your, you know, your shopping behaviour at all, could that happen or not?
Participant: No, because I think I’m pretty much in a similar mindset as buying smaller amounts that I can carry. I think if I had a car and was loading up then I wouldn’t, you know, I don’t think I’d think too much but because I’m having to carry everything, I try and estimate and work out how many bags I’ll need.
Interviewer: Sure. And do you think this charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person at all or not?
Participant: Yeah, by about 25% I’d say, a bit, I’d say some improvement not... I try to be anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah, what do you think would happen, what could change in terms of environmental behaviour after the charge?
Participant: I would just take more bags with me.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in England or in Britain overall?
Participant: Yeah, to a fair amount.
Interviewer: Could you tell a little bit more about it?
Participant: I’ve seen notices that say “Do you need this? Can you recycle?” So bins outside, recycling bins for carrier bags. I shop in charity shops and they often encourage you to, if you’ve got your own bag, yeah, so I think it’s on the agenda but it’s not... Oh, and also I think now shop assistants ask you if you want a bag rather than just giving you one which I think is a big difference from when I was growing up, so there’s no longer an assumption that you’ll take a bag.
Interviewer: Absolutely. Apart from the charity shops and kind of independent shops which probably by nature, you know, are kind of off the mainstream, what do you think about the rest of, you know, more kind of?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve noticed, I think most cashiers ask me “Would you like a carrier bag?” So they don’t just offer it so again I think it’s much more limited now, it’s not just there for your taking whereas in the past they’d be like a massive pile of carrier bags.
Interviewer: So still, yeah, there is a bit of a change, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, definitely, you have to make an extra effort to ask for them and it’s not that it’s a problem to get them but.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. You know when the 5p charge comes to England apparently there will be some types of bags and some types of outlets that will be exempt from the charge and I wanted, you know, to give you a few examples and to ask your opinion whether you think it is a right situation or not.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Whether that is, that the charge should apply or not in your opinion.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: The first one is medium to small retailers and corner shops, they will be exempt from the 5p charge on the plastic bags, do you think this is a right situation or not?
Participant: No, I think everybody should do it.
Interviewer: And how about hot food, takeaways so basically bags for takeaway hot food and drinks?
Participant: No, I don’t think, I think everybody should do it.
Interviewer: They should do it, yeah. And how about, you know, clothes and shoes for those, because again that’s another type of outlets that will be exempt from the charge?
Participant: It’s difficult because I think some types of clothes need particular wrapping so I would suggest they probably don’t as much.
Interviewer: And how about paper and biodegradable bags?
Participant: What are you asking me? Sorry, what?
Interviewer: Yeah, how about paper and biodegradable bags because again that’s what has been, you know, that’s what has been decided that they won’t be charged, paper and biodegradable?
Participant: Yeah, that’s okay, yeah.
Interviewer: So you would say that’s okay as well, okay. I also wanted to ask you to compare the plastic bag charge to two other types of charges. I do remember that we probably discussed the first one which is the higher fuel duties.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how do you think this is, is this comparable at all or not?
Participant: No, no, I don’t.
Interviewer: And how about the charge on plastic bottles and plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables? For example, this would be more for deposits so it does exist in other countries, in Germany for example, people pay a little deposit when they buy a bottled drink in plastic and when they bring the bottle back they get the deposit back. Again it’s probably something around 5 or 10p, something like that.
Participant: Yeah, that’s a great idea.
Interviewer: Is it a great idea? Do you think people will bring their stuff back instead of, you know, throwing it away?
Participant: Yes, I do.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah. And what do you think could happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: I would hope it would make people think more and more about other packaging that they use and plastics.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, okay. The next sort of part of questions is more on about other sort of behaviours that we touched upon in the diary, so do you tend to save water and energy at home at all?
Participant: Yes, I really try to.
Interviewer: So what do you do in order to save?
Participant: Only use water when I’m, I need to brush my teeth, not keep it running. I only fill the kettle for as much water as I need. I don’t, I use a semi-flush on my toilet. Turn lights off when I’m not in a room or when they’re not needed, that’s about it.
Interviewer: And do you have a water meter at home or not?
Participant: I do.
Interviewer: You do, yeah, so you do tend to save water?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: And do you reuse things at home?
Participant: I reuse jars, I reuse plastic bottles.
Interviewer: For what kind of purposes?
Participant: I might put water in them and for jars I might put spices in them or salad dressing or just store things, jam jars in particular and obviously with bags I might reuse for my dog.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And what do you do with your waste at home?
Participant: I try and recycle as much as I can, so I recycle plastic, tins, glass, cardboard, paper, food waste, batteries.
Interviewer: Yeah, how do you find the recycling facilities at your place?
Participant: Pretty good.
Interviewer: What kind of bins do you have?
Participant: Three or four different, so a general waste bin, a food sort of compost, a bin for plastic and tins, another one for paper and cardboard, jars, yeah, so there’s about four, four different ones.
Interviewer: I see, yeah. And this is a kind of habit for you to recycle?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: To recycle these or do you need to think about this?
Participant: No, I just recycle automatically.
Interviewer: Do you drive at all?
Participant: I can drive but I don’t own a car at the moment.
Interviewer: You don’t own a car at the moment, okay. And do you tend to walk or cycle?
Participant: I walk.
Interviewer: You walk, yeah, for short distances like two or three miles?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: So if you had that compared to public transport, I mean what do you regularly choose to do?
Participant: Walk.
Interviewer: You try to walk, yeah.
Participant: I always try to walk, yeah.
Interviewer: And why is that?
Participant: Cost and for my health because it’s a way of, I’m not very good at keeping fit so it’s a... and also it means my dog gets exercise as well.
Interviewer: Sure. And does it happen that you buy either eco-friendly cleaning products or you know Fair Trade products or organic or sustainable?
Participant: Occasionally, I used to buy a lot more but I think because my income is a lot less I don’t tend to buy those things because they do tend to be more expensive.
Interviewer: And how about support to environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: In the past I supported Greenpeace but...
Interviewer: Was it through the nations or through signatures?
Participant: It was sort of direct, direct debit, monthly.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to sign any kind of petitions now or in the past did it happen?
Participant: Yes, I would have, yeah.
Interviewer: But you don’t do it now currently?
Participant: Not at the moment, no.
Interviewer: And why is that?
Participant: Nothing has been presented to me recently.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: Moderately.
Interviewer: Could you tell a little bit?
Participant: Well actually I’m a bit confused because I think there’s a relation between, a strong relationship between environmental issues and poverty so I’m really concerned about poverty and famine but because I don’t know enough about the relationship between those two ideas but I know that environmental issues do inform the future, you know, if you are thinking about the wider issue, the environment, than it can change sustainability. So actually I think for me the headline is poverty but underpinning that is probably an environmental issue but I tend to respond more to poverty.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. Would you say that environment is an important part of yourself, of your identity?
Participant: Yeah, in a quiet way, yes it is.
Interviewer: Which means?
Participant: That I try and do it just to make it a part of my life but, an everyday part of my life, and I try as much as I can to make my children aware of it as well.
Interviewer: You were saying that, I was just going to ask you now, compared to other issues in modern society and, you know, how important the environment is and you said, you know about poverty and how about things like health or economy, society in general, how important sort of, how you know. compared to that how...
Participant: I think I’d put it number two, I think it would be poverty, environment, I think environment and health is equal.
Interviewer: Right, why are they equal?
Participant: Because I think they inform one another because if you’ve got a poor environment than it will affect people, you know if you think in the past about things like asbestos and I was listening to something recently about the tea plantations in India and the way that like tea farmers are forced to live so that’s like health and environment and, yeah, I think they’re interconnected.
Interviewer: And do you think that you have enough knowledge and enough skills in the environmental area at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Why do you say so?
Participant: I just think I could know more, I just think there’s a lot more to learn about.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you think people could learn about or you yourself?
Participant: The whole, yeah, the whole, you know the cost of... well it’s a massive issue really, I don’t know, just a bit overwhelmed so not, you know, the whole economics about you know sustainability versus landfill sites.
Interviewer: I see. So they basically don’t know what happens on those, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And do you think that people receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And again what do you think could actually be done in this area?
Participant: Things like... I’ve got so many conflicting ideas about, well conflicting ideas, I’ve heard about solar panels, sort of heating, like wood fire burners, I just don’t know whether that, yeah, I just, I’m really unclear about whether they’re efficient and helpful to the environment and, you know, there’s something I’d like to do.
Interviewer: And do you think, you know, there should be any kind of tangible support such as infrastructure or maybe things like legislation, regulations, around the environmental area in Britain?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: And what kind of areas again do you think should be?
Participant: Just to make people, I guess there’s an incentive to do, to make choices that are sustainable rather than... I think the problem is, which applies to me, that I go for the cheapest option because if money is short that’s natural instinct I think but if you encourage people with an incentive via the government to make things more affordable then we’ll make more of an informed choice.
Interviewer: So that will be better, okay. Do you think there is enough currently communication on environmental issues or not?
Participant: Not in an accessible way, no.
Interviewer: And should there be more or do you think it’s a sufficient amount?
Participant: I think it needs to be connected to other issues like, like I said, health and poverty and economy, I think they’re all interrelated and I think the problem is environmental issues tend to be isolated.
Interviewer: And what makes you think about it?
Participant: About what, sorry?
Interviewer: Well about the fact that they need to be sort of made related and to be tackled together?
Participant: Because I think people, including myself, need to see the interconnection between all the various, it’s about taking responsibility for what you do and the choices you make and it’s like give a whole package rather than yes, I buy biodegradable washing up, it’s not just that, it’s you know with everything and if, so it’s a domino effect so if you, you know, if you grow vegetables or if you have solar panels, I mean there are so many options really, I think it’s enormous.
Interviewer: Yeah, of course. And is it some kind of point of view that you tend to have generally or is it, you know, only in relation to the environmental area?
Participant: What view?
Interviewer: That you know things need to be like seen together.
Participant: Yeah, definitely, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And just maybe the last question about this bit is are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Could do better I’d say, I’d give myself a C, I’m average, but I think I could definitely do better.
Interviewer: What do you think you could do better?
Participant: I haven’t got solar panels, I haven’t got a water butt, partly because I don’t understand the implications and the cost. What else could I do? I don’t really understand about turning... one of the things that really struck me is about turning things, the plugs off at the mains switch which I really agree with but I don’t know if you can do that with the internet so I’m not, I’m a bit confused about if you can turn everything off and like the internet would work the next day so.
Interviewer: Well it definitely will, I can tell you from my own experience, yeah, I don’t like to have waves around so I do turn it off for the night.
Participant: You do?
Interviewer: Yeah. I’m on Virgin and nothing happened to it at all.
Participant: Okay, I’ll start doing that then, that’s good.
Interviewer: Sort of related to that, would you be, you know, researching this kind of information on your own or would you be, you know, rather if it’s available, it’s available, if it’s not, you know?
Participant: I would like to say that I should have researched it more but I didn’t but now I’ve asked you it’s good and I’ll do something about it. In the past, in lots of other ways I do turn things off at the mains but I wasn’t sure about the internet, so yes, I’m pleased about that.
Interviewer: And regarding your neighbourhood, this is actually the last question of you know, what we’ve had to cover, what are the things that you particularly like and what are the things that you like less and why?
Participant: Lots of people, like today lots of people will put things outside their house for recycling, like items that they can no longer use, they get passed on, so I think people don’t buy as much. I think there’s a big recycling ethos where I live, people might make art, you know, using recycling materials, children at local schools make artistic things using things like bags, carrier bags so I’m pretty happy.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what do you find possibly problematic in your neighbourhood, if anything?
Participant: Oh, litter.
Interviewer: Litter, what kind of litter is that?
Participant: I think there are some shops or some people who just dump big bags of food waste or it’s hard to identify but there are just specific areas where there are lots of litter, there’s lots of litter dumped.
Interviewer: Yeah. And is there any kind of, you know, plastic bag related litter at all or not?
Participant: Yeah, sometimes people dump things in plastic bags.
Interviewer: The sort of supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, either in the streets or in, there’s a specific alleyway or by public bins, they’ll dump plastic bags.
Interviewer: And any kind of vandalism or antisocial behaviour experienced or not really?
Participant: No, it’s just dumping litter I’d say.
Interviewer: Yeah. So do you think this could change after the charge is introduced in England in terms of at least the supermarket plastic bags and stuff?
Participant: Hopefully, I would like to think yes.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, okay, thank you very much Karen. So I’ll just finish maybe, I think I do have the demographics data from you so I don’t need to ask those questions now. What I will probably say now do you have any questions to ask me?
Participant: Oh no, not at all, it’s very thought provoking.