Interviewer: Okay great, so could you please tell us how you found the diary filling in experience overall?
Participant: It was really good. It was quite enjoyable to do and it, it didn’t take up anywhere near as much time as I thought it was going to, so it was quite nice in that regard.
Interviewer: Was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: Not really, it was all, it was all quite well thought out and quite, quite well done, I thought anyway. But yeah, I didn’t have any problems with it at all.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you?
Participant: The one things that did, one of the questions did, mentioned about putting the, just enough water in the kettle for the, for the cup of tea and I haven’t, I hadn’t actually been doing that at the time, but after reading it I thought I’d start doing it and it has, it has surprised me that I’d certainly start following that.
Interviewer: So after you read it, you started doing it…
Participant: I did, yeah.
Interviewer: …like automatically, or like…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …you thought oh, I’m going to do this now?
Participant: No I think because I’d sort of read it, I just kind of started doing it and catching myself doing it afterwards sort of thing.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s interesting. So could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Usually when I do food shopping, I buy in smaller amounts, usually for a [recording skips] two a week, depending on what my work shift pattern is. So what I’ll do is probably go and do Tesco’s or Asda and spend about £15 to £20 a time, rather than doing everything in a big sort of monthly shop. So I buy a lot of, a lot of perishables, fresh fruit, veg, that sort of thing, as opposed to anything that’s like really long-term, freezerable, however, I do once a month, I get our frozen stuff delivered from wherever [recording skips] the time [laughter].
Interviewer: From where sorry?
Participant: From wherever has it cheapest at the time. I usually use a company called Muscle Foods, but yeah, if there’s anywhere else [?? 3.10] I’ll get it delivered from them.
Interviewer: And you shop at Asda did you say the rest of the time?
Interviewer: Hi, sorry I think the signal cut off or something because it went all silent, I couldn’t hear anything. Do you have a landline I could call you on?
Participant: I do, yes, would you like that number?
Interviewer: Yeah, sorry the signal keeps going and then it just goes totally silent.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: I don’t know if you’re speaking in answer, sorry. Sorry about that.
Participant: That’s fine.
Interviewer: What’s your landline?
Participant: It’s 01242 512287.
Interviewer: Okay, I’ll call you back on your landline now and then I’ll speak to you in a minute.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: That’s much better. Okay, so you were saying Muscle Foods?
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: You get deliveries from them and you shop at Asda was it as well?
Participant: Asda and Tesco, yeah.
Interviewer: Asda and Tesco, and how often then do you go shopping, do you do your food shop? So once a month for your online delivery of frozen food?
Participant: Yeah. Everything else is usually about once a week, once every seven days.
Interviewer: And is there any reason why you like shopping at Tesco and Asda?
Participant: I find, Tesco was primarily because they were running that fuel money back thing for ages, but they’ve stopped that now so I’ve actually reduced how much I go to them. Asda I find to be conservely cheaper than, than the other large, larger supermarkets, and they tend to have a better select, better selection of sort of health foods and free from foods as well.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping? Do you take a list with you?
Participant: I tend to just wing it when I get there [laughter].
Interviewer: And when you’re sort of choosing what food to buy, what is more important and what is less important to you?
Participant: At the moment, one of the most important things is the amount of calories per serving because I’m sort of on a diet at the moment, but also I take into account how much I’d have to pay, so sort of like cheapness of items as well.
Interviewer: And how do you normally travel to the shops?
Participant: Oh I’ll drive my car.
Interviewer: And do you tend to go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Usually by myself.
Interviewer: And how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: Very little. Maybe about 5%.
Interviewer: Could you please tell me five words or expressions that come into your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: [Laughter] breakable, usually free, bad for the environment, I have a lot of them [laughter, reusable a lot of the time though.
Interviewer: And do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Do I remember when I came across them for the first time?
Interviewer: Mmm.
Participant: God, I must’ve been about five I think [laughter]! Not, not very clearly, no.
Interviewer: So could you tell us a bit about it or do you just literally not remember?
Participant: I don’t really remember, I must’ve been very young when I first, first came across them. Sorry about that.
Interviewer: That’s okay, and what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping in?
Participant: I will pretty much exclusively use supermarket plastic bags because I keep a, a supply of them at home and when I get my monthly frozen delivery, I tend to individually wrap things like chicken and put them in the freezer wrapped in bags.
Interviewer: So is that the sort of plastic, the thin plastic ones?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And is that sort of an automatic thing that you do without thinking? Is it part of your usual routine?
Participant: It is, yeah, I don’t, I do intend to, a lot of the time, bring a couple of these bags for life that we have, but it’s just so ingrained to grab these plastic bags when you get there that you don’t think about bringing them half the time.
Interviewer: So is the reason that you use the plastic bags more because you want to wrap your frozen food in them or more because, I don’t know, you just sort of do it, you don’t really think about it?
Participant: I think it’s more because I just don’t really think about it. If I gave it a bit more pre-planning, I’d probably use an alternative for wrapping stuff.
Interviewer: And is that the same for when you do a big shop and a small shop?
Participant: It is yeah.
Interviewer: So why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well I assumed it’s supposedly because they’re supposed to last a very, very long time, but I have had a few that tend to go after only a couple of months, so I’m not 100% on that, but I reckon it’s because they’re supposed to be, you can buy yourself a couple and just keep reusing them all the time.
Interviewer: So do you think the bags match their name or not?
Participant: Most of the time they do, yeah, it’s rare that they, they go beforehand, but a few of them have.
Interviewer: So what’s good and what’s not so good about the plastic bags that you use when you go shopping?
Participant: The good thing about them is the convenience of them, how easy it is to just grab a load and put all your shopping in them. The bad side to them, they’re not that strong, a few times in the past I have had bags break between the car and the door of a house, so they’re not as reliable as other forms of packing. But yeah, aside from that…
Interviewer: So you said you got these because it was kind of automatic? So is that why, why you think you buy, sorry you don’t buy, you use them rather than bags for life?
Participant: I think so, yeah.
Interviewer: And rather than sort of bringing like a rucksack or something?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Oh actually that isn’t relevant really. In your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: In my opinion, I think it’s perceived to be quite, quite an important one and I think I’d view it as quite important, but if they stopped providing them, I don’t think it would be as big an issue as we all think it would be [laughs].
Interviewer: So if plastic bags completely disappeared from shops, how do you think you’d find that?
Participant: I’d probably gripe and complain the first time or two as I forgot that there weren’t any and I’d turned up with nothing else, but after a little while I imagine you’d, you’d make the adjustment quite quickly to bringing a backpack or, or some bags for life or a crate or something like that.
Interviewer: And do you ever reuse the plastic bags that you get from supermarkets?
Participant: Yes, yes I do.
Interviewer: Because obviously you use them for your frozen foods?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever use them as bin liners?
Participant: Occasionally I do. I don’t find they’re too strong for that sort of role, they’re alright in a small office bin, but they’re not too great in anything larger.
Interviewer: Why do you tend to use them as bin liners?
Participant: Again, just convenience and they’re cheaper than actual, proper bin liners.
Interviewer: And sort of how many plastic bags do you think you currently have at home roughly?
Participant: Probably about 700 [laughter], yeah.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: Yeah, we’ve got a huge sort of dispenser thing that goes on the back of the kitchen door, and when, when we unpack, just put all the bags in there and then we can take them out from the hold as we need them.
Interviewer: So is 700 like an exaggeration or is that…?
Participant: No honestly it is, there’s definitely about that there [laugh].
Interviewer: So do you sort of reuse all of them or do the others, do a lot of them sort of sit there?
Participant: A lot of the time, to be honest, I don’t think we get the dispenser down. The lowest is probably about a third out and then we just end up putting a load more on the top.
Interviewer: So do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: I don’t, no.
Interviewer: Okay, so this is a national charge of 5p for single-use plastic carrier bags.
Participant: Oh okay.
Interviewer: Yeah, so what do you sort of think about that?
Participant: I suppose it would depend on sort of where the money’s going really. If it’s just an excuse for supermarkets to make a bit of extra money, then I’d probably have a bit of a problem with it, but if it’s due to an environmental tax or something like that, then I could probably understand it. I still wouldn’t be that happy about it, but, yeah.
Interviewer: So did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Is it actually?
Interviewer: [Laughter] yeah.
Participant: I didn’t know that. I had, I think they’ve got it in Wales or something haven’t they?
Interviewer: Yeah they do.
Participant: Yeah. No, I didn’t actually know they were going to roll it out as a, as a requirement.
Interviewer: Yeah they are in, yeah in October this year.
Participant: Oh dear! That certainly could change things [laughter].
Interviewer: So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think probably it’s to discourage people from using them as much, because they’re not, they’re not really the best things and you do, you do see when people have just let, let them get out, they’re all over the centre of towns and things like that, and they do cause a fair bit of disruption sometimes, but I think that’s probably the main idea behind it.
Interviewer: So to reduce litter?
Participant: Do I litter?
Interviewer: No sorry, to reduce litter?
Participant: Yeah, to reduce litter, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah [laughter]. And do you think that the plastic bag charge will fulfil that purpose then, to reduce litter?
Participant: To be honest, yeah, it probably would, I mean it would certainly stop me from having as many.
Interviewer: Well I guess you’ll find out.
Participant: Yeah [laughter].
Interviewer: So do you think the introduction of the 5p plastic bag charge will affect you?
Participant: Oh definitely!
Interviewer: In what respect?
Participant: It’s definitely going to be making me think about whether or not I actually need to keep stockpiling quite as many bags as I have, and will certainly make me think about whether or not I’m actually going to keep using plastic bags like that.
Interviewer: So do you think you’ll change the types of bags that you’re using or the amount of bags?
Participant: I think, to be honest, I’ll probably change the amount, to the type, the type of things I’m using.
Interviewer: What do you think maybe you would use instead?
Participant: I’ll probably either go and get a couple of bags for life, or because of the way my car boot is weirdly shaped, I’ll probably fit backpacks in it better, so I might get a couple of them.
Interviewer: Do you think sort of changing your bag use then will be easy or do you think it’ll be quite hard to sort of adapt?
Participant: I think in all honesty it’ll be relatively easy. I just think I will moan a bit about it at the start [laughs].
Interviewer: And do you think it’ll change your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: It probably will actually. If, if everywhere’s rolling out this sort of charge, I might end up going to supermarkets that don’t have them anyway, you know, like Lidl and Aldi don’t tend to provide bags. So yeah, I might switch.
Interviewer: Because they don’t provide bags?
Participant: Yeah, so I won’t have to worry about accidentally grabbing, you know, grabbing any, incurring a charge when I don’t really need them.
Interviewer: Oh okay, okay. Just so you know, I think Lidl does have bags.
Participant: Oh do they?
Interviewer: Yeah, just so you know.
Participant: Oh okay.
Interviewer: I’m not sure about Aldi though…
Participant: There’s definitely one of them that doesn’t.
Interviewer: …I’ve never been to it.  And do you think that the plastic bag charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: Probably. The only reason environmentally negative thing I do do, is probably the, the vast amount of plastic bags we have [laughs].
Interviewer: So it will make you more environmentally friendly…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …by reducing the bags?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you think there’ll be any other changes after the charge was introduced, so maybe for your local area and your country?
Participant: I’m not sure really, I mean it’ll be nice to see the reduction in litter and everything locally, but in the grand scheme of things, I don’t know if it’ll bring on any other major sweeping changes.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is encouraged enough in your country?
Participant: Probably not at the moment, they are just generally viewed as a sort of disposable, get rid of it item.
Interviewer: Do you think that that should change?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: So when the 5p charge does come into effect in England, there are going to be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge might not apply.
Participant: Oh okay.
Interviewer: Do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: No, I suppose if they’re going to bring in the charge, they should really just bring it in for the entirety of plastic bags really.
Interviewer: So you don’t think it’s fair?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How do you think that the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as you know the congestion charge?
Participant: Oh yes.
Interviewer: So how do you think it compares to that?
Participant: I think it’s probably a lot more reasonable to be honest with you. The congestion charge I’ve never really agreed with, not that I’ve ever really, really had to pay it, but yeah, I think the plastic bag charge is a lot more reasonable.
Interviewer: What if they were to start charging plastic, for plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables?
Participant: Oh that’s a really interesting idea. I think that would be maybe a bit uncalled for, but then again, those are the sort of, those individual plastic wrappings are the sort of things that I tend to just throw right away when I get back, they don’t have a great deal of use outside, so maybe I just stop, stop using them.
Interviewer: Do you think you’d support those charges then or not?
Participant: I don’t think I would initially, but given a, a month or two, I probably will get behind them.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge coming in?
Participant: Well I imagine we’d be looking at almost no use of those, those reusable plastic bags. I think they might become a thing of the past [laughs].
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: We sort of do. We’ve put a few, it’s sort of a bodge job, we’ve put lots of sort of airbag things in the, in the toilet cisterns and things like that, so that we can, we reduce the amount of water they fill up with. So in that regard, we do, we also have a few water buckets and what not that we use for gardening instead of running anything off the mains.
Interviewer: Is that sort of collecting rainwater then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Oh okay, like a water butt?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Why do you save water at home?
Participant: Mainly because of the price of, the price of using it is, seems to be getting higher and higher at the moment. So that would be the main reason.
Interviewer: And is it a habit that you do these things or…?
Participant: It is now, yeah, I never used to when I was younger, but it’s something my mum kind of drilled into me.
Interviewer: What about energy? Do you save energy at home?
Participant: We do try to. We always try to turn off lights when they’re not in use, you know, use energy saving light bulbs, things like that.
Interviewer: And why do you save energy at home?
Participant: Again, because of the rising cost of energy bills. It’s just a way to fight that and it’s kind of become ingrained now.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well, or do you have to plan it?
Participant: Definitely a habit now.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: We, well yeah, we do, we will reuse a lot of things to be fair. We reuse a lot of plastic bottles, I re-purpose them into sort of like slug traps for the vegetable patch and things like that.
Interviewer: Do you have any more examples?
Participant: I reuse pallets as fencing and building compost bins, things like that, yeah.
Interviewer: Why do you reuse things at home?
Participant: Again, it’s just cheaper than buying things new [laughs] and it’s easy to find a lot of these things that have been thrown out and they’re just quite good for gardening.
Interviewer: And again, is this sort of a habit or do you have to plan still?
Participant: That I have to plan to do.
Interviewer: And when you’re doing your food shop, do you, so you mentioned, do you look at the packaging a lot?
Participant: I do yes.
Interviewer: You mentioned looking at was it the calorie intake?
Participant: Yeah, calorie levels of things.
Interviewer: So do you think is the packaging in itself important to you?
Participant: I imagine the label parts are, I’m not that bothered about branding and, and how it looks, but as long as it’s got the information I need on it, I’m quite happy.
Interviewer: So when you’re looking at the packaging, basically you’re only looking at it to find out information about the product itself?
Participant: Yes, pretty much.
Interviewer: And do you recycle household waste?
Participant: We do, we reuse old coffee grounds and things like that, composting, I’m trying to think what else we use… [Laughter] I tell you what there’s a lot that does get done but you know, you can’t remember it all off the top of your head.
Interviewer: Why do you recycle?
Participant: Again, it’s just a cost-saving measure. It’s cheaper than going out and buying bags of new compost and things like that.
Interviewer: And your recycling, is that a habit or do you have to plan to do it?
Participant: That’s definitely a habit now.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: If I’m on shift, I will drive twice a day for seven days, if I’m off, I probably won’t go out that much in the car.
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I do yes.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Again, the petrol’s far too expensive [laughter].
Interviewer: Okay, that’s fine, and is that a habit as well or not?
Participant: It is yes.
Interviewer: Do you ever walk or cycle short distances?
Participant: I walk and hike quite a bit. Cycling is not something I do at the moment, no.
Interviewer: So the walking, is that for leisure?
Participant: No, I will use it if, if we just pop, if I just need to pop down to the local shops or something, I’ll, I’ll walk down there as opposed to taking the car.
Interviewer: And how often is that do you think?
Participant: Probably not that often, maybe once/twice a month.
Interviewer: And again, is that a habit or do you have to plan to…?
Participant: It is definitely a habit.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: No I don’t.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why not?
Participant: I’ve never really noticed a huge different between the two when it comes to eco-friendly or not. Recently I’ve, I’ve been working sort of at a factory that makes non-eco-friendly stuff and it’s a lot cheaper for me to buy it direct from there.
Interviewer: And what about organic foods? Do you ever buy organic food?
Participant: I do a fair bit of the time actually. It tends to taste a lot nicer than non-organic, in my head anyway, it’s probably just a, a placebo effect, but I seem to think it does.
Interviewer: And how often do you buy organic food? Most of the time did you say?
Participant: Yeah, most of the time, it’ll probably be at least once a week.
Interviewer: I think it tastes nicer too.
Participant: It does doesn’t it [laughter]?
Interviewer: Yeah. My mum grows all of our vegetables and things, so…
Participant: Oh really?
Interviewer: Yeah, so then when I taste one that’s been like from a supermarket that’s not organic, I think it almost tastes like something different.
Participant: Yeah, it’s like it’s had it’s all, all the flavours bleached out or something.
Interviewer: Mmm, yeah. Anyway… So do you ever buy sustainable food, so foods that go towards sustaining animal welfare, forests or fisheries?
Participant: Fish definitely, we do buy a lot of sustainable fish. The other things not so much. I do believe there’s a certain brand of root vegetable we buy that does go towards some sort of sustainable growing, but I’m not 100% sure on that [laughter].
Interviewer: Why do you buy these things?
Participant: Fish especially because I’ve seen just how over-fished some of our local seas are, so I think it’s kind of like something we really need to get a handle on.
Interviewer: And do you support environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: I do to an extent, I used to be a member of the Countryside Alliance and things like that, but I, and the Wildlife Federation, but I haven’t in the last six months or so.
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we’re just sort of been talking about, have you noticed anything about them during the diary period?
Participant: Nothing out of the ordinary, every, I mean everything that was relevant got noted down, so…
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: That’s an interesting one. It just means acting, acting in a way, monitoring your consumption of things, your waste, your imports and exports in such a way that you’re not sort of destroying the environment that we utilise at the same time.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: I’d say about eight out of 10.
Interviewer: What type of issues are you concerned about?
Participant: I do have quite a concern about the energy usage that we have in our country, well worldwide really to be honest. I think we should start moving over to a lot more renewable sources, your energies such as solar, so that’s quite high on my agenda, things like global warming.
Interviewer: Why are you concerned about these things?
Participant: Energy-wise, I used to, a number of years back, I used to work at an energy distribution centre, and see the level of consumption we’ve got is just completely unsustainable, and global warming-wise, I keep seeing [laugh] in various papers at the moment about how rapidly the ice caps are melting.
Interviewer: Is that newspapers?
Participant: Yeah newspapers, online, things like that.
Interviewer: What does the environment mean to you?
Participant: It means, it basically means our habitat, our, our way of life, our way to continue existing.
Interviewer: Is it an important part of your identity in your life?
Participant: It is, yeah.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Because without it we wouldn’t exist.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: That I create?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Quite concerned actually. I’ve tried to find ways to curb it, but it’s, it’s a lot more difficult than, than you’d think [laughs].
Interviewer: What about recyclable waste?
Participant: Most of the stuff here does get recycled, so we keep on top of that.
Interviewer: So your main concern is the non-recyclable waste or…?
Participant: Yeah, because for the sheer level of convenience, a lot of stuff I do end up buying is stuff that’s non-recyclable and it’s just viewed as throwaway, so it does create quite a large amount of waste.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so social issues, economic issues, health, how important, if at all, are the environmental issues to you?
Participant: I’d say they’re pretty high up.
Interviewer: So more important or as important? Less important?
Participant: I’d say probably a bit more important.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, not at all.
Interviewer: Why do you feel like that?
Participant: I don’t think a lot of the information is that easily accessible. If you want to find a lot out about it, you’ve really got to dig. It would be nice to see it sort of like in a, in the big main newspapers, but you very rarely get it.
Interviewer: So do you think you’d like to improve that then…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …the amount that you know?
Participant: Definitely.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: I think most of, in, in most aspects, yeah I do.
Interviewer: Would you like to improve your skills?
Participant: Oh I’m always learning, yeah, anything that can be done is good to do.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples or is it just more like, you know, you can always learn more?
Participant: I can always learn more. I’d specifically like to learn more about becoming sort of like more reliant on things you can produce yourself, that would be quite a good thing.
Interviewer: Okay yeah, it’d be quite interesting.
Participant: Mmm.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: In regards to everything that’s going on at the moment, I think I do, but if I wanted to sort of switch to a more, to a greener, sort of sustainable living, I’d certainly need to have more available.
Interviewer: How about support from the government?
Participant: I don’t think there’s a massive amount of it from the government to be honest. I mean I know they provide the recycling bins and things like that, but I think they probably could do a bit more.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of what more they could do, what more could or should be done?
Participant: They could focus more on trying to reduce our carbon footprint, incur more corporate taxes in that, in sort of that way, maybe push out instead of long-term, you know, not being recyc, the recycling isn’t collected that often, they could, that could be improved.
Interviewer: What about support from environmental organisations?
Participant: There, there is a lot out there if you’re willing to go and get it, the only issue with that is I think you’ve kind of got to prove that you need the support from them and that can be a time-consuming process.
Interviewer: So basically there needs to be more support and information that’s more available or it should…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …rather than you having to go and do everything yourself basically?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah okay. Do you think that there’s enough communication on environmental issues, so on what people should be doing for the environment?
Participant: No I don’t, I don’t think there really is at all. It all seems to be a sort of vague, we need to do this, but no one really seems to know why [laughs].
Interviewer: So yeah, like we need to reduce our carbon footprint…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …but without telling people how or why?
Participant: Yeah exactly.
Interviewer: Yeah okay. What do you think about the legislation and regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: I think a lot of it is quite good. We have a protected greenbelt very close to where I am, so I mean that’s quite a good thing, however, I do think that any form of legislation they seem to have, if someone has enough money, they seem to be able to bypass it completely anyway [laughs].
Interviewer: So it has ups and downs?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: So are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: At the moment, yeah.
Interviewer: Which of your environmental behaviours are you particularly happy with?
Participant: I think I’m the happiest with reusing the items we reuse.
Interviewer: Why are you happiest for that?
Participant: Because it’s just quite satisfying to sort of build something out of something old and use it for something new.
Interviewer: And which of your behaviours in this area are you not so happy with?
Participant: Again, I’m not as happy with how much waste I’m allowing to accumulate, I’d like to change my behaviour to buying more sustainable sort of things, yeah.
Interviewer: What are the main problems, if any, in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Well relatively, to be honest, the neighbourhood, it’s quite problem-free to be fair.
Interviewer: So no problems with…?
Participant: No, no problems.
Interviewer: So that’s kind of all the questions I have for you actually.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Well, well I lie, I’m just going to ask you some demographic questions if that’s okay?
Participant: That’s fine.
Interviewer: But yeah that’s all the sort of interviewey type questions done.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Okay well that’s everything. So Phase Two is starting in November, 13th of November to 22nd, the diaries, and then there’s the, an hour-long interview again, and that one’s got a slightly higher payment of £70.
Participant: Oh okay.
Interviewer: And you’ll get entered into a prize draw to win an iPad as well.
Participant: Excellent [laugh].
Interviewer: So do you think you would be interested in participating in that?
Participant: I certainly will.
Interviewer: Okay great. Well we’ll be in touch then at the start of November.
Participant: Excellent.
Participant: Bye.