Interviewer: So could you tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Um, very straightforward to be quite honest with you, you know, I mean it was sort of, you know, fairly self-explanatory after the... So the first night was obviously just sort of going through the layout but it was fairly straightforward, to be fair.
Interviewer: Okay. So it was quite easy.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: That’s good. Was there anything quite tedious to write down?
Participant: No, not particularly, I mean when you... Because we probably shop entirely the wrong way for cost-effectiveness I think but it seems to be more what I sort of interpret as the more current way of shopping is we do a lot of sort of individual calling in just for top-up shops I suppose, sort of bread, milk, ham, cheese, you know, bits for the kids, you know, things like that, we do an awful lot of that because we’ve found that it negates then, we can sort probably of get away with once, maybe twice in a calendar month then going and doing a massive shop in a supermarket.
Interviewer: So did anything surprise you?
Participant: Yes, some of the things that surprised me have been sort of the questions that have prompted, you know, from the questions that are asked you almost sort of consciously then start thinking about things and looking at things, the big thing that I’ve found myself doing, just purely from the wording of a question on the survey is, you know, driving more fuel efficiency, you know, I’ve noticed myself sort of thinking, I’m going to change gear now, don’t put your foot down too hard, you know, as I’m driving, just simply through thinking, you know, I guess something pricks your conscious every now and again and I think that probably just did mine.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s made you drive more efficiently then or less?
Participant: Yes. More, definitely.
Interviewer: Well that’s not such a bad thing then is it?
Participant: No, no, definitely not. Definitely not.
Interviewer: Please could you describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Um, I mean we do probably two types because we do... My sort of average one which I do numerically most I suppose is, you know, I will call in at the closest supermarket that I feel comfortable to and literally sort of pop in and it tends to then be very much impulse purchasing, if I’m totally honest. You know, there may be staple that I will go in for such as, you know, like I said before, you know, I’ll pop in for bread, milk, ham, cheese and I’ll come out with, you know, then two bags of cookies, a packet of crisps, some sweets for the kids, you know, if there is something on offer that I think the children would like or we would like even sometimes, I do tend to very much be browsing and buying rather than going in with a shopping list and try to stick to it rigidly, I don’t even try to do that if I’m totally honest.
Interviewer: Okay. So what stores do you tend to use to buy your food?
Participant: I tend to use, locally we have a little Co-op, I also have an Asda which, you know, my daughter does gymnastics three times a week and in St. Austell there is an Asda and a Tesco, that’s all there is and the Asda I prefer shopping in to the Tesco’s because it’s a newer store and it’s much brighter and just a nicer place to be I think so I tend to just pop in there, a) to pass some time and b), you know, it’s a convenient time that I’ve got to pass anyway while she’s in her lesson just to cover over the bits and pieces that we need in the next few days, you know, the town where it is she does gymnastics three times a week so it’s very convenient for either of us to just pop in and pick up if we find we’ve run out of something rather than going and doing a big shop, I suppose you would call it.
Interviewer: So how many times a week or month would you say you went food shopping?
Participant: We probably go three times a week.
Interviewer: And how would you normally travel to the store, well stores?
Participant: By car.
Interviewer: By car.
Participant: Yeah. Driven fuel efficiently of course now!
Interviewer: What is important to you when choosing what food you want to buy and what is less important?
Participant: I suppose the thing that draws us in, I’m very fickle really, I suppose the thing that draws us in is still image and colour and looking fresh and tasty I suppose is probably the best way of putting it.
Interviewer: And do you tend to go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Tends to be by myself because I’ve got two young children, one aged nine and one aged six. My nine year old is the one that does the gymnastics and things. My six year old, by the time she comes home from school, is sort of shattered so it tends to be that mum and my... My wife works in a school as well so it tends to be that she will come and just sort of collapse and they stay at home, I bring the other one to gymnastics so I have an hour to sort of kill or an hour and a half to kill and just tend to pop in then. Alternatively, the other way of doing it, is I call on my way home from work, you know, because I travel by car to work, I work about half an hour from where we live, it’s normally about a half an hour journey time each morning and evening and there are two or three such supermarkets along the way.
Interviewer: And the supermarkets you go to are they... Well the shops that you go to, you mentioned Co-op and Asda, are they kind of like the big shops or are they the smaller ones?
Participant: No, the Asda is quite [?? 08.41] I mean that’s a relatively reasonable sized supermarket. The Co-op is a local convenience... I say convenience, they’re a little bit bigger than probably like a corner shop but it’s just a local convenience store.
Interviewer: Yeah, I know the one that you mean. And how much of your food goes to waste every week, sort of an estimate?
Participant: Um, varies quite dramatically I would say but on average probably... Probably 5%, maybe 10%. We buy, again, you know, things for the children we buy sort of quite a lot of grapes and bananas and stuff like that but if they’re not fresh they don’t eat.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: And you know, I have to say, we’re not great at keeping on top of the fridge because I will sometimes just pop in and think, oh, we need ham and I would rather buy two lots and have two lots within two days than risk running out.
Interviewer: So you’re potentially throwing away food that’s kind of past the, what’s it called, use by date or...?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: It’s just lost its freshness.
Participant: Yeah. Yeah.
Interviewer: Please could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear ‘plastic bag’?
Participant: Um, easy use. Um, multipurpose. Um, throw away.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Um, I suppose free.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Um, [pause] I’m stumped! [Laughs]
Interviewer: No, that’s great stuff! I’ve lost count anyway but it doesn’t have to be exactly five. Do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: Not really. They’ve kind of always been there I suppose.
Interviewer: What types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: The very slim cheap carrier bags, you know, the throwaway ones.
Interviewer: And what are your reasons for using those types of bags?
Participant: Disorganised I think is probably the honest answer! If we go shopping, to be fair, if we go shopping in my wife’s car, in the boot of her car there is a sort of little pocket, we’ve filled that with Bags for Life and bits, you know, a number of carrier bags that sort of live in there and even then it’s very very rare we remember to take them because you know, you’re looking at the children, sort of going, oh gosh, you know, have you got this, you know, do you have that, take this, put that down, take that with you and because they’re such an easy alternative in terms of there being [?? 12.12] at the end of the aisle, you know, it’s just far easier than walking back to the car and thinking, oh yeah, I best go and get the bags out of the boot to simply go, yes please, I’ll have some carrier bags.
Interviewer: So is it kind of an automatic thing?
Participant: I think so, yeah, I mean, you know, I know it’s all supposedly going to change with this... They’re bringing... As of October we have to start paying for them, you know, legally everybody has to charge for them but I would imagine most supermarkets, they will sort of be 5 pence per carrier bag or something like that and in the scale of a hundred pounds worth of shipping, is 10, 20 pence going to make any real difference to your shopping, you know, possibly, possibly not. I suppose I think it will lead to people using less carrier bags, I think it will certainly lead to us using, you know, prying more into a carrier bag and using less but not necessarily stopping using them.
Interviewer: Yeah. So you tend to use the kind of thin plasticy ones...
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: ...for your big shops and your smaller shops, basically any kind of shopping?
Participant: Yeah. Quite often, to be fair, quite often with the smaller shop they will ask us, especially if it’s in Co-op they will ask us, do you want a carrier bag for that and we haven’t even got enough to warrant, you know, some bread, some milk and a thing of, as I say a block of cheese and perhaps a bag of [?? 13.42].
Interviewer: So is sort of the amount of shopping that you have, is that the main reason...
Participant: As I say, it shouldn’t be so bad that I lose you. Yeah, sorry, where were we?
Interviewer: So you were saying that you don’t tend to have that much shopping, so...
Participant: Yeah, I mean quite often, yeah, quite often I don’t even take a bag, you know, as I say if it’s a couple of loaves of bread, say a block of cheese and a bag of cookies or something like that then they can just go on the seat next to me, , especially if I’m in the car, as I say, you know, they can just go on the seat next to me, it doesn’t always mean, you know, it’s easy enough to carry, especially as I say, if I’m on my own on my way back from work and I’ve called at the Co-op because I’ve got no children to hold or hold hands with and nobody else in the car, so it can just sort of sit there and that tends to be the way that we do.
Interviewer: So is there a particular reason why you choose the small kind of thin bags over Bags for Life or like a rucksack or something like that?
Participant: I think at the moment it’s just, you know, it’s just a free alternative isn’t it, so it’s just far easier. I mean some of the supermarkets, you know, they just sort of almost start packing them for you in them without even asking.
Interviewer: Well yeah, that’s true actually. Yeah.
Participant: You know, and just assume that you want them.
Interviewer: Okay. So where do you store... Oh, you’ve already mentioned actually that you keep bags in the boot of your car.
Participant: Yeah, in my wife’s car.
Interviewer: In your wife’s car.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So...
Participant: And then shop mainly in mine which makes an awful lot of sense!
Interviewer: Where do you store them in your house, if you do have like a collection of plastic bags?
Participant: We have, yeah, we have a cupboard under the stairs which has got one big plastic bag with probably, I would imagine, a couple of hundred others stuffed into it.
Interviewer: Right, okay. I think everybody has a bag of bags somewhere in their house.
Participant: [Laughs] [??16.30] somewhere.
Interviewer: So in your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: There needs to be some form of bag available. I mean I specifically don’t sort of shop in places like Aldi and Lidl because it’s too much like hard work quite often, in terms of service through the till and you know, if I forget the carriers it’s all chaos breaks loose.
Interviewer: Do they not have carrier bags?
Participant: I believe you can buy the bags but again I think they’re... You know, for the amount of time, I’d just rather go somewhere where I know it’s convenient I suppose.
Interviewer: And do they charge in Aldi and Lidl for their bags?
Participant: I assume so, they’re normally on the end of one of the tills I think.
Interviewer: So that’s why it’s...
Participant: They’re not, yeah, they’re not even... If you get to the till and realise you’ve forgotten them you can’t even just go, yeah, I’ll have a couple and they pass them up to you, they’ve got them somewhere down one of the aisles I think or say on one of the end of the tills, it’s not...
Interviewer: Okay, so that kind of puts you off shopping there.
Participant: I suppose so, yeah.
Interviewer: So what if plastic bags completely disappeared from every store, how would you find that?
Participant: Annoying!
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, very. I think the... I suppose you’d just have to, you know, like a lot of things you think you couldn’t do without them but I suppose we probably could and you would just sort of get a couple of the plastic euro crates or something like that that live permanently in the back of the car. I mean going back in time, I know when it was Safeways, before Morrisons owned the supermarket in Newquay in Cornwall, the supermarket where I used to live was a Safeway store and they had sort of green, almost like bread crates that you could... I’m trying to remember, I think they gave so many away when they, you know, like say you did fifty pounds worth of shopping you could get one of these crates for free and you got sort of two or three of those and that became sort of almost the accepted way of having, you just had them in the boot of the car and they were multipurpose in terms of, you know, you could bung all sort of bits and pieces in them and then when you wanted to go shopping you also still had them in the boot of the car and just sort of emptied whatever you’d got in and went shopping and they were branded as well so I suppose it kind of drove a little bit of brand loyalty as well I suppose.
Interviewer: Oh, that’s interesting. So you think you would maybe manage if there were these crates available instead potentially?
Participant: Yeah, I mean, I’m sure we would come up with something, you know, I think we’d possibly just, as I say, you’d go out and find something that fitted really nicely in the bottom of a trolley that you could just then lift in and out of the car I suppose and make it easier for yourself that way.
Interviewer: Do you ever re-use plastic bags that you’ve bought in supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah, we do re-use them. We re-use them for all sorts of things I suppose.
Interviewer: What kind of things?
Participant: Carrying oddities to and from, I mean you know, we’ve just been away for the weekend and I looked in the boot of the car when I unloaded at about half past ten last night in the rain and it was full of bags, one with shoes in, one with spare clothes for the children in, one with a book we’d brought for somebody, you know, that kind of thing.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you ever use them as bin liners as well?
Participant: No. No, we... Again, my parents live up in South Yorkshire and they have, you know, they get provided with a wheelie bin for... I think it’s a wheelie bin for anything to recycle, a wheelie bin for compost, a green bin for garden waste and a general sort of wheelie bin as well. I get three canvas bags, fairly small bags to recycle in, one for plastic, one for cardboard and one for paper and I do have a wheelie bin because we have seagulls so we actually went and bought one but the Council don’t provide them for us and there’s no sort of, I suppose... You know, so we don’t [?? 21.34] anywhere near as much as we probably should or could do.
Interviewer: You don’t what sorry?
Participant: Recycle.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: You know, anywhere near, so we generate quite a lot of waste because everything just goes into the bin.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you don’t use plastic bags to line like the small bins in like...?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. So...
Participant: I mean general purpose waste liners I suppose you’d call them, I don’t know, black bin bags.
Interviewer: Yeah. So you’ve already mentioned that you’re aware of the plastic bag charge, the 5p charge for the thin single-use plastic carrier bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Where did you hear about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: I think it was on the BBC News or something or it would be on the internet or on the news itself, as I say I was aware that it’s coming in but it’s not, you know, I suppose it’s something that I’ve just been aware of generally, I don’t necessarily think that I’ve had a mass debate about it or anything like that, it’s just something that I’ve become aware of, as I say, I’ve seen it somewhere, as I say I’m fairly sure it was BBC News.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think about the charge coming in?
Participant: Um, it depends, yeah, I don’t know enough about it to know what the money’s going to be used for. If they’re using it to bolster supermarket’s bottom line, if they’re [?? 23.25] tax for, you know, 90% of it goes to the government for [?? 23.31] or it’s going to get lost within the tax system then, you know, I don’t think a great deal of it. If it’s going to be supplied to a [?? 23.43] either a research into finding ways of conserving something or it’s going to go to a good cause use then I would support it wholeheartedly. As I say, my fear I suppose is that it either gets used to bolster the bottom line of the... You know, I mean 5 pence per bag, if you think, I mean I wouldn’t like to guess, I use probably [?? 24.16] probably uses four bags, so 20 pence per shopper, five thousand per day in a big supermarket I wouldn’t think is out of the way, a thousand pound a day per supermarket, three hundred and sixty five thousand pounds, you know, times however many supermarkets you’ve got.
Interviewer: So your support kind of depends on what they’re using this money for?
Participant: Absolutely. Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think are the main purposes of this plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well I think it’s to help reduce the amount of plastic bags that are used, it’s to try and put people off, you know and to try and encourage people I suppose to re-use what you’ve already got rather than just keep ploughing on and on and on like I do!
Interviewer: And do you think the plastic bag charge will help to do that?
Participant: I think it will help to do that, as I say, you know, I don’t necessarily think it will stop me using those plastic bags, I think it will probably force me to cram more into a plastic bag, so where I used, if I used, let’s say I used six before, I would probably use four now. I still don’t think it would be enough to put me off using them entirely, I think if I got to the till and had done my shopping and the plastic bags were out in the car park, would I rather pay 20 pence more for bags, you know, bearing in mind it’s probably a twenty thirty pound shop, 20 pence more for some bags or walk out to the car and walk back and have all the hassle of, you know, you’re just got to have to wait there while I just go and get some bags, I know you’ve put it all through, there’s a queue behind me but rather than do that I think I would just go, okay, 20p, fine, no problems, you know, in the grand scheme of things I don’t think it’s necessarily going to stop people using it at all, I don’t think it’s going to stop us necessarily using them at all.
Interviewer: Okay. Well the next question I was going to ask you is how you think the charge will affect you but it sounds like maybe it won’t necessarily?
Participant: Not, as I say, not initially, I think it may do over time, I think as I say, for the first year, you know, especially if it’s sort of big shopping, even if let’s say we need ten bags for the shop and it’s 50 pence, if it’s a hundred pounds worth of shopping, 50 pence is not really going to make a difference one way or the other, you know, I think if let’s say you did that six months consecutively you might on the seventh month sort of think, actually you know, I may need to remember the bags, out of those six months I might remember them once, I think you might sort of start thinking about it more and over time that would then become actually, oh I need to get, you know, a bit more sort of habitual I suppose because of... So it’s kind of a prompt, a bit like I was saying to you, you know, something’s pricked your conscious with like the fuel economy and driving, you know, I think after a while the pricking of the conscience may well come. I don’t it necessarily would [?? 27.43] enough to say, that’s it, I can never use another one of those, recycle all the bags that we’ve currently got.
Interviewer: But it might happen over time?
Participant: I think it probably would happen over time, yeah.
Interviewer: Maybe if you see lots of other people that are, I don’t know.
Participant: Yeah, absolutely, I think, you know, I don’t... As I say, I still think if you’ve got, you know, if you haven’t remembered to take them in to start with I don’t think I would come to the end of my shopping and think I need to go out and get the bags. I think I would just kind of go, you know, sod it, I’ll pay the 20p whatever it is rather than dragging everybody outside and then coming back in again, you know, especially if you get to the point of starting to put your shopping through and think, oh God, I’ve forgotten [?? 28.35], never mind, it’s fine. So I do think, you know, you might do that a couple of times and then you would sort of potentially, you know, we might start to think potentially, yeah, I’m going shopping tonight. It is basically just disorganisation that causes me not to use them.
Interviewer: Do you think the charge is likely to make you a more environmentally friendly person?
Participant: Um, no.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: [Laughs] No, I don’t think it is.
Interviewer: That’s fine.
Participant: I don’t think, you know, I don’t think it’s that significant...
Interviewer: Yeah. What do you mean, 5p isn’t enough?
Participant: I don’t think so.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think there’ll be any other changes after the introduction of this charge, so...?
Participant: I think, I wouldn’t be surprised, as I say, following on from this, eventually over time, I wouldn’t be surprised to see the withdrawal of those types of carrier bags entirely and making it all into, I mean Bag for Life at the minute, I don’t know what a Bag for Life costs, a pound? I don’t know but I wouldn’t be surprised eventually to see them go to something like that, that yes it costs more to have one of those but it drives people to use it I suppose and if the alternative wasn’t there of having those bags either cheaply or freely then I think like I say, you would find, you know, if that was withdrawn in its entirety I think you would find some other way of coping with it. I don’t think we’d all stop going shopping and starve.
Interviewer: No. Do you think that would be a good thing or not?
Participant: Um, environmentally I think it probably is, yeah.
Interviewer: But more of a hassle for the people do you think?
Participant: In the immediate short-term I think it probably is more hassle, you know, it needs to be a gentle decline else it’s going to cause mayhem but I think if somebody was to come up and go, you know what, it’s a phased programme, we’re going to do this over this many years, this over many years and this over this many years and by ten years’ time we are not going to have these bags. I don’t really see that anybody would have any major objections.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think that bag re-use is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you think that should be changed?
Participant: Yeah, I mean, I suppose my view changed a little bit because I’ve had children and you do start thinking about the future for them and what the world will look like in twenty years’ time and if we continue to wreck the way that we are then it’s not going to be a great place. If we can do things to make it better for them then, you know, so much the better. However, [?? 31.42] with you know, actually I’m probably one of the worst examples of not doing that, you know, it’s very easy to sort of stand there and say it but like I say, we’re that well driven personally to do it I suppose that I would [?? 32.02] if I was stood at the front of the queue and thinking, oh I’ve forgot me bags and there’s a queue behind me, I would still go and get them wouldn’t I, so you know, there is a degree of convenience and I suppose ignorance really a little bit in it.
Interviewer: But if it was encouraged more in general around England...
Participant: Yeah, I think...
Interviewer: ...do you think your attitude might change a little bit or no?
Participant: I think, you know, I think it’s such a background issue isn’t it.
Interviewer: Mm.
Participant: I think, for me, I mean I work in an industry that uses an awful lot of wood and it’s all about sustainable growth, [?? 32.55 SSV board] and you know, where the wood’s come from having a sort of chain of where it’s been sourced and everything like that, you know, so ethically sourced product sells better than cheaper and I do think that as a country we are quite environmentally ignorant really. I don’t think, you know, I don’t think people and I include myself in it, you know, would have... What’s your take on environmental issues, what environmental issues would probably be the first question I would ask, you know, I don’t have any real strong views on let’s say the planet.
Interviewer: So when you mention the plastic bags, that being kind of a background issue and then you’re talking about your work with sustainable wood.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Were you kind of like almost implying that maybe you think more about chopping down trees when you think about the environment, am I right?
Participant: Yeah. Yeah, probably so. Definitely.
Interviewer: So you’re not really thinking about bags because as you say, that’s in the background?
Participant: If you said to me what’s one environmental issue I wouldn’t have said plastic bags...
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t even know if, you know, if you asked me to list ten environmental issues whether, certainly before this, whether I would have listed use of plastic bags as an environmental issue.
Interviewer: Okay. What kind of environmental issues do come to your mind?
Participant: Um, first thing, I mean, you know, I do an awful lot of miles, I go out to customer’s houses and measure up so I think the first thing that probably comes to mind would be CO2, petrol, you know, car use, things like that. I’ve done quite a bit of business with a guy who runs a wind farm and fuel use and sustainable energy use would probably be the highest thing that I would sort of say, you know, as a country we need to focus on.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see what you mean now when you say about plastic bags they’re in the background.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: As I say, you know, for me it just doesn’t, you know, it didn’t really even register as massively as an environmental issue.
Interviewer: So when the plastic bag charge, when it does come into effect in England, some shops will be exempt from the charge.
Participant: Oh right.
Interviewer: So smaller corner shops, they won’t be charging people whereas bigger supermarkets by law will.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: I’m just wondering what are your thoughts on that, do you think it’s fair or...?
Participant: Um, [sighs] not particularly, no, because a lot of the supermarkets now have what they call convenience stores don’t they? Will they be exempt, say like a Tesco Express or a Morrisons whatever they are and Sainsbury’s Local or whatever, Co-op small stores, will they be classed as sort of convenience stores that are exempt from this charge?
Interviewer: I think it’s to do with size, so...
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: ...if they have a certain number of staff then they have to employ the charge but if they have less than that number of staff then no, so...
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: ...maybe, potentially yeah, the smaller chain stores might not have to charge.
Participant: Yeah. I think if it’s, you know, let’s say three staff, then it is going to be your independent corner shop that doesn’t have to charge then I think that’s maybe a good thing because it does give them an advantage over but if the bigger supermarket small shops if you like, if they can get in on that act that’ll just encourage them to make more small shops and give them away, you know, if they find it increases trade they’ll just change the way that they actually do business.
Interviewer: So it’s not necessarily fair or unfair, it’s just...
Participant: No, I don’t think it’s particularly sort of, you know, fair or unfair, I mean the supermarkets have a [?? 37.58] sort of business size and everything else that some of the independent stores could probably do with a little bit of a leg-up, I think it’s, you know, I don’t think the supermarkets can really cry foul with some of the buying power that they’ve got to get the goods cheaper to start with, so you know, [?? 38.20] necessarily a bad thing.
Interviewer: So how do you think that the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, for example congestion charges in busy cities and charges on plastic bottles and things like that?
Participant: I don’t know if I can comment really, to be honest with you because I don’t live in a city where I pay a congestion charge, you know, I’ve never, I don’t think I’ve ever actually even drive through the congestion charge or through a congestion charge zone and I wasn’t particularly aware that there was a plastic bottle charge.
Interviewer: Right, okay, so...
Participant: Showing my ignorance again here! [Laughs]
Interviewer: I mean, I suppose it doesn’t really matter if the congestion charge doesn’t actually affect you but would you say that the plastic bag charge that is going to be introduced, could you compare that to a congestion charge or in your mind is it something completely different?
Participant: Yeah, I think in my mind it’s something completely different, again as I say, because I think probably I don’t know enough as to how the money’s going to be used, I mean the congestion charge, you know, is for, as I understand it is for research into sustainable energy and CO2 and hybrid cars, electric cars, doing research into things like that, that money goes back into those kind of issues, if the same happens with the plastic bag charge then I suppose, yes, I can equate the two and it’s a good thing, so I think it depends, is the money going to a central fund, is the money going to government or is the money going to supermarkets, you know, that’s where for me the decision whether it’s a good thing or a bad thing probably sits.
Interviewer: Yeah. So what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of this plastic bag charge that’s happening?
Participant: Well, you know, I think it’s probably somewhere along the line going to come to an end and whether that be in ten years’ time I don’t know, I mean I would like to think potentially it might be in ten years’ time that, you know, we don’t have those bags and as I say, people are encouraged to do it differently but I think it would need to be something that is phased in and bought into by all the supermarkets together and driven by time I suppose, in ten years is that long enough to achieve it, yeah, I would have thought so, you know.
Interviewer: Okay, so you think that that potentially could happen?
Participant: Yeah, I think it could. Yeah, absolutely, as I say, I think, you know, I think we’ve seen, you know, I’ve certainly seen locally an instance with, as I say I’m sure it was Safeway that introduced these green crates and they were everywhere, everybody had them and you went and did your shopping in there and you took these green crates with you and you used to see people with three or four lined in their trolley and packing them as they went round and then you literally just sort of scanned them through, I mean the other thing that they did to encourage that as well was a self-scan service, so as you went round you scanned, so you could literally pack as you went round and then you just paid your money and lifted them out and they went in the boot of your car. Simple! You know, you didn’t really have a mass inconvenience of thinking, you know, I’ve got to pack this into, you know, and remember to take them because they were probably big enough that you couldn’t unpack them I suppose, you know, they just generally lived in the boot of the car and as I say, it almost became second nature and habitual to take them in with you and because everybody else had them and was doing it as well, as I say, I don’t think it was a mass shift from where we are in terms of expecting people to change the way that they shop massively and it happened over a couple of years, so ten years down the line I would think, you know, very much it could well have changed.
Interviewer: Yeah, I wonder why they stopped doing those crates?
Participant: I think Safeway themselves were bought by Morrisons weren’t they? So Safeways as a business stopped trading.
Interviewer: Oh, okay.
Participant: And then it was just integrated into Morrisons and Morrisons took, you know, all sorts, I mean there were several things that I think Safeway were well ahead of their time in trying to do, I don’t think they managed the cost of it very well but there were several things that from seeing that they were, as I say, well ahead of their time in trying to achieve.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: You know, they had the till price changers, so instead of printing off a load of tickets, you know, along the front of the shelf edging?
Interviewer: Right.
Participant: Instead of printing off tickets here there and everywhere, they just had little digital screens and from computers would just change the price if it changed, if it went on special offer you would change the price via a computer, so you wouldn’t have to print out any labels.
Interviewer: Just a bit on sort of household behaviours now then. So do you save water at home?
Participant: Um, [pause] I don’t necessarily think it’s consciously save water as in, you know, do lots of things, the only thing that I think we consistently do as a family to save water is when we’re brushing our teeth we turn the tap off.
Interviewer: And is that a habit?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you think that you do that?
Participant: Um, I suppose it’s really because the water is directly in front of you running away down a drain, you know, I can’t particularly think of anything else that we do that’s sort of particularly consciously to preserve water.
Interviewer: Okay, that’s fine. What about energy?
Participant: Again, my wife has sort of general OCD in regard to plug sockets, she hates plug sockets being left switched on, you know, the television never is on standby, it’s always either on or it’s off at the wall, you know, plug sockets are there for a reason and you switch them on and off in her mind and I suppose having lived with her for sort of twelve years it’s just again been beaten into me I suppose! [Laughs]
Interviewer: So do you do that more to please her?
Participant: We just, you know, it’s just something that we all as a family do I suppose, it’s just something that now again is habitual.
Interviewer: So that’s a bit of a habit as well.
Participant: Yeah, very much so, you know, before I leave the house in the morning, if I’m the last one out or certainly if I’m going out and I’m in the house on my own and I know, you know, she does the same, you know, you just sort of quickly walk round the house and make sure all the plugs are off.
Interviewer: Okay. Why are your main reasons for doing that do you think?
Participant: I think it’s more to do with the fact of, you know, if a plug socket, if an appliance is switched on it could in theory catch fire, if it’s switched off at the wall then there is no chance of anything happening with it.
Interviewer: Okay, so it’s a safety...
Participant: I think so, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever look at packaging in supermarkets?
Participant: In regard to the amount of packaging?
Interviewer: Um, yeah, I suppose. It’s quite a vague general question.
Participant: Oh, so yeah.
Interviewer: Or anything really, if you...
Participant: Yeah. No, not really, I suppose is the honest answer, you know, if two products were the same cost, one looked nicer than the other and had more packaging, I would probably buy the one that looked nicer.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you ever re-use things at home?
Participant: Um, [pause] yeah, I suppose we do. I mean, we do a lot of, or my wife more than I do does a lot of sort of crafty bits with the kids so we will make models out of cardboard boxes, you know, empty packaging, things like that, we will use half-cut empty bottles to put water for paints and things like that in.
Interviewer: That sounds fun!
Participant: Yeah! [Laughs] But other than that, not particularly.
Interviewer: Okay. When you do re-use like you said the bottles and the packaging, is that kind of a habit or do you plan, oh I’ve got some empty bottles here, I’m going to put those to the side and save them for...?
Participant: No, it’s more a case of, you know, the children will say, I want to do some painting and if there is an empty bottle sat on the side then we’ll cut it down and use it, if there isn’t one on the side she will get a container, you know, a plastic cup or something like that out the cupboard and then wash it afterwards.
Interviewer: Okay. Did you say before that you didn’t recycle because your Council didn’t provide you with the facilities was it?
Participant: They only provide these really small canvas bags.
Interviewer: Canvas bags, I’ve never heard of that before, that’s quite interesting.
Participant: Yeah, I’ve sent you a photo of our recycling through actually.
Interviewer: Oh, brilliant!
Participant: Somewhere. There’s a picture of a wheelie bin with three recycling bags outside of it.
Interviewer: So do you recycle it all or no?
Participant: We do, yeah, again cardboard, paper and plastic and that’s it.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: If there is... I mean, again, it’s probably, you know, partial laziness and partially down to the size of the bag that we get given and they collect it once a fortnight so it’s things like, you know, if there was... I use the one that I’ve seen today, a Cherry Bakewell, Mr Kipling’s Cherry Bakewell box, we’d finish the box and there was plastic inside it, that has gone, I know that has gone straight in the bin rather than breaking it down and the plastic going in the plastic bit, the cellophane going in the bin and the cardboard going in the cardboard piece.
Interviewer: So it’s quite a lot to do with the fact that it’s quite a lot of effort sometimes...
Participant: Yeah, I mean it’s...
Interviewer: ...and that you only have those canvas bags.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. How often do you drive?
Participant: Daily.
Interviewer: Sort of to and from work is that?
Participant: To and from work and for work as well, as I say, I work as a kitchen designer so I go out to people’s houses to measure up for their kitchens and to have a look at their space and things like that, it’s an interior design service.
Interviewer: So you’ve kind of already answered this actually but do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: I do now! [Laughs] Do you know, it’s really strange, I’ve sort of found myself thinking... Oh, I was driving down this sort of, it’s a dual carriage way most of the way but it’s single carriageway that then goes to a dual carriageway up a hill and quite often going up there, if I’m in a rush I will just sort of pull out and go past people and sort of put my foot down going uphill which uses an awful lot of fuel and I’ve sort of thought, do you know what, I’m going to get two car lengths up there, that’s not really worth it, I’ll waste so much fuel! And I sort of think, where has that come from, you know, I was so proud of myself!
Interviewer: So it’s quite a new thing?
Participant: Yeah, absolutely.
Interviewer: Okay, well that’s an unexpected result of this! [Laughs]
Interviewer: But I’m happy. Do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: For leisure I do, for business, no.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: So for example, taking the children to school, if the weather is nice, the school is about a mile and a quarter from home and if the weather is nice and we are ready early enough we will walk to school and drop the children off and come back. If there is, you know, we are running a little bit late or if the weather is not sort of great then we’ll drive or if we are going somewhere from there we will drive. If I’m going to the shop and I’m just literally in the middle of watching something but think, oh I need to get something, you know, my wife suddenly decides she wants a bar of chocolate or we’ve run out of milk or something like that, I will just jump in the car and go over. Again, it’s probably about a mile and a half.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Not purposely, no. If that’s what’s on offer in the super... You know, I wouldn’t necessarily not buy something because it’s eco-friendly and a cleaning product but I certainly wouldn’t go out of my way to look for it.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: You know, if something specific was on offer, you know, then I would buy it, if it’s not then no.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see what you mean. The fact that it’s eco-friendly isn’t really a selling point for you.
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: Not for a cleaning product, no.
Interviewer: Not for a cleaning product specifically or...?
Participant: Well I suppose not for most products really I suppose.
Interviewer: Do you buy organic food?
Participant: Um, no.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy sustainable food, for example, to sustain animal welfare or forests?
Participant: No. [Laughs] [?? 53.47] I’m really bad at this aren’t I?
Interviewer: No, there’s no, you know, like we’ve said, there’s no right or wrong answers at all. It’s fine.
Participant: Yeah. No, no, no.
Interviewer: Do you support any environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: Um, actually I do! You’ll be very surprised to know.
Interviewer: What?
Participant: Only one.
Interviewer: What is that?
Participant: Surfers Against Sewage. It’s a quite a big environmental group in terms of, you know, I live by the North Cornwall coast, a lot of [?? 54.57] sort of in my, from being sort of eighteen to being probably thirty, I spent an awful lot of my time in the water surfing, kayaking, coasteering, various things and the water quality around Great Britain is not great and the biggest environmental group for that sort of thing is as I say Surfers Against Sewage and I’m still a member today.
Interviewer: So how do you support it?
Participant: I’m a member of, it costs me, I think it costs me forty quid a year to still stay a member of... It’s almost as a token gesture but I really, you know, I think the work that they do is very worthwhile for me personally I suppose.
Interviewer: So all of these things I’ve just mentioned like saving water, energy, buying organic foods and things like that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period other than I suppose the car driving?
Participant: Not massively, no. No, I haven’t, you know, I think in one sense I’m probably quite set in my ways in terms of, you know, I will... I suppose in one sense I’m lazy is the best way of putting it because I will just pick up the first thing that is on the shelf, I will pick up the first thing that, you know, in my [?? 56.11] you know, the nicest packaging or the freshest looking irrespective [?? 56.17], you know, whether it’s to a product that’s got less packaging on it to a product that’s organically grown or sustainably farmed or whatever else, you know, it really is, I’m quite sort of impulsive really in that sense I suppose.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. What does ‘environmentally friendly behaviour’ mean to you?
Participant: Um, I suppose just... Probably engaging your brain before you do it, which you know, I have to do an awful lot of at work and when I’m outside of work I don’t tend to do, I think is probably the honest answer.
Interviewer: So just thinking about the environment.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, you know, it’s not something that other than the things that actually affect me personally on a day-to-day basis sort of in front of your nose, quite literally sometimes, you know, I don’t think it necessarily, you know, we all live in this sort of bubble I suppose we call it that unless it actually affects me I don’t need to do anything about it.
Interviewer: So environmentally friendly behaviour in your eyes is maybe putting in, I don’t know, like mindfully making an effort to do things.
Participant: Yeah. Yeah.
Interviewer: It’s not a part of everyday life.
Participant: Not yet, it’s not ingrained in us all I don’t think and it’s certainly not ingrained in me yet.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, so I see what you mean. So how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Again, I’m sounding terrible here, only the ones that affect me, I think probably, you know, concern me and the ones I contribute most to, so CO2, carbon dioxide use in terms of creating a better atmosphere and things like that for me to breathe, you know, what I’m breathing in and if I go into a city and I’m looking at where I live, you know, the air is fresh most of the time but if I go to a city and you feel a real difference, the air quality is awful sometimes, you know, we had a weekend away in London, February half-term, we had three or four days away and I came back feeling like I’d got sort of asthma or some kind of chest infection because...
Interviewer: Oh no!
Participant: And it’s just purely I think down to the fact of the air that I was breathing was rancid, you know, you’d go outside and literally it was horrible, so that I think, you know, you think of them that brings more to mind what’s causing it and I mean the biggest thing that’s causes it is cars, buses, lorries, transport within that city. I don’t know, as I say, I know the right things [?? 59.33] water quality issue affects me, I go surfing, I don’t want raw sewage pumping out next to me.
Interviewer: Yeah, understandably!
Participant: You know, but that side of, yeah, I think it’s more that side of the environment in terms of what is my surroundings rather than what is overall happening in the world, I think is probably where I would put it.
Interviewer: So do you think the environment is an important part of your identity or not really?
Participant: For me, no, I don’t think it is necessarily. I enjoy it, don’t get me wrong, I enjoy the environment that I live in because I’m very fortunate in the part of the country that I live in but you know, [pause] do I think that I do enough probably environmentally friendly things to help keep the environment that I live in, probably not but...
Interviewer: So it’s not really an important part of your life?
Participant: It’s not particularly an important part of my life, no.
Interviewer: Okay. How concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I’m not particularly at all concerned by it. I guess if I stop and think about the amount of waste that as a family we create then I probably should be but on the back of that I kind of think, well is it my personal responsibility or is it our, you know, do we... If it was that important, you know, we spend enough time worrying about things happening in other countries, things happening in other parts of the country, that actually if what I was doing was important then people who are paid much more money than I am and do much more senior jobs within this country than I am and people who are doing research into these things would be telling us that actually it’s imperative that we do these things, you know, rather than... I suppose it’s almost, for want of a better word, I think for me to do something about it I would need to be told to do something about it and almost given the tools to do something about it but if I’m supposed to be recycling more, I need to be given the tools to recycle more. If I was given the tools to recycle more, would I recycle more? Yes. Am I going to go out and get those tools for myself? Probably not.
Interviewer: So how do you rank environmental issues compared to other issues such as the economy, health, things that are happening in society?
Participant: Probably not as highly. I think a lot of that is to do with the way they’re represented, you know, if I switch on the News the first thing that comes on at night is not the plastic bag tax coming in, it’s we’ve got twenty thousand refugees from Syria coming in, that is probably more a pressing issue for me to dedicate my thought to than, you know, it’s wrong to try and compare the two but in terms of where do they rank within somebody’s psyche, you know, I don’t think until something specific happens, be it somebody makes a decision that we are as a country going to do this, we are going to charge for plastic bags, we are going to scrap plastic bags entirely, we are going to outlaw packaging and it’s all going to just live on a shelf, whatever it might be, until somebody makes that decision I don’t think it will rank as highly as what’s actually happening in the day-to-day, I think it’s seen as... The way I certainly see it is it’s something that, you know, is a long-term issue not an immediate issue.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues, sort of in general?
Participant: No. No. I think again that’s partly to do with the representation of them.
Interviewer: Oh, like you said, it’s not in the news, it’s not really a pressing thing.
Participant: No, it’s not a mainstream, it’s not for me in my life, it’s not a mainstream topic of conversation, you know, it’s not, you know, I don’t see it on the news particularly, I don’t talk about it with friends, other than again, you know, the issues that specifically affect me.
Interviewer: Do you feel like you’d want to potentially gain more information about environmental issues or not really?
Participant: Almost no because again, I see it as a longer-term issue than a short-term issue and I think there are enough short-term issues without having to worry about the longer-term ones at the moment.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment? Well, you already said that you didn’t actually didn’t you?
Participant: Yes! [Laughs]
Interviewer: Okay. Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly, for example, from the government or...?
Participant: No. Not in the slightest.
Interviewer: Not in the slightest! Okay.
Participant: As I say, I think they should be leading across the, you know... They should be leading the general public in what this is, if they see environmental issues as important they would spend more time trying to lead the British public and I don’t see or hear them doing that at all, you know, i.e. when it comes to election time, you hear environmental questions asked and sort of almost brushed by the wayside and you go onto more, as I say, less long-term issues for immediate pressing issues, you know, we talk an awful lot about defence, we talk a lot about immigration, we talk about fiscal policies, things like that, that actually impact on day-to-day living now, not day-to-day living in twenty years’ time.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: Um, [pause] I could do more, absolutely, I think we’ve already established! But...
Interviewer: But are you happy with that?
Participant: Do I feel unhappy at the fact of what I don’t do? Not especially. I wouldn’t say I’m happy with what I do for the environment, no but I’m not especially unhappy about it either.
Interviewer: So you’re kind of indifferent?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. And would you like to change anything in your environmental behaviours or not?
Participant: Um, yeah, I suppose I would because for the reasons I sort of said to start with, you know, I have two young children and you want to keep the world as nice a place as you can for them and there are issues that could with addressing but as I say, for me they tend to be lost under more immediate issues.
Interviewer: What kind of behaviours do you think you’d maybe like to do but don’t?
Participant: Well I mean I think we should recycle more, you know, I probably should drive a car that’s more fuel efficient. I don’t particularly drive an un-fuel efficient car at the minute but I think if there was better, more affordable electric, hybrid, you know, to the stage of hydrogen which is apparently the next big thing if somebody can find out how to store it, you know, if they were more affordable, more available, you know, there’s very few of them around and they’re not particularly great to drive at the minute, if that sort of technology was there and as I say, more affordable and more obtainable then I think I would probably look at that, you know, I think that would be for me the biggest change I could probably make, personally.
Interviewer: If any, what are the main problems in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Um, [pause] I don’t...
Interviewer: Like vandalism, antisocial behaviour, litter, things like that.
Participant: [Laughs] If I’m totally honest, I’m really fortunate that I don’t have a huge amount of anything to deal with where that’s concerned.
Interviewer: Well that’s great.
Participant: Yeah. No, we live in a village in the middle of a rural setting which is probably ten years behind the rest of the country, you know, it’s wrong to say but I’ve got a family moved in three doors away from us who are a Polish family and they’re almost like sort of celebrities within the village because they’ve come from... You know, it’s literally that far behind.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay.
Participant: Yeah, you know, it’s amazing that these places still do exist but it really does, you know, I mean I originate from South Yorkshire and look at where I came from to where I live now, you know, my shed hasn’t had a lock on it for two and a half years...
Interviewer: Oh wow!
Participant: ...you know, and nothing has gone missing. You know, I still...
Interviewer: Sounds like a great place to live.
Participant: I still quite often leave the front door unlocked, you know, it is changing and it is catching up with the rest of the world but I’m really lucky, as I say, in where we live it is quite a genuinely nice place to be. I mean I looked at moving back to South Yorkshire about eight years ago and I always remember, I swapped the newspapers, local newspapers with my parents because they were sort of interested at looking at ours and the front page headline on my local newspaper was, horse gets loose on A30 and causes chaos and the front page of their newspaper was that there’d been a knife fight in the town centre and there was two dead and one in hospital and you just sort of thought, you know, this is just crazy! So we stayed where we are but yeah, it is, you know, I’m really pleased to say I don’t have any of that to deal with at the minute.
Interviewer: Okay. So I’d just like to ask you some demographic questions now.
Participant: Sure.
Interviewer: We’re just sort of coming towards the end.