Interviewer: So maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how you found the diary experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was okay, it was quite interesting, yeah, it wasn’t, quite, yeah, fairly easy, it wasn’t too bad, I’ve never done anything like that before so yeah, something different.
Interviewer: And what did you find easy?
Participant: It was just, well obviously it was each day so you could remember what you’d one each done so it wasn’t too hard to remember what you’d, about your habits that day.
Interviewer: And was there anything that you found a bit tedious to write down, a bit difficult?
Participant: It did get a bit repetitive towards the end I suppose, it was kind of, yeah, you were kind of doing the same things each day I suppose, so yeah, it did, it did get a bit repetitive I suppose.
Interviewer: Yeah, I’m sure that was you know, we kind of expected that that would be the case, but it’s also, yeah, that’s the purpose of the study.
Participant: Yeah, you’re doing the same thing day after, you sort of realise…
Interviewer: Exactly, yeah, that’s the routine.
Participant: …every day’s the same.
Interviewer: Yeah, I mean I’m sure there were different days…
Participant: Yeah, I know, I know, but it seemed like that at times.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you at all in the diary?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no, no, I wouldn’t say anything surprised me, no.
Interviewer: Okay, great, so maybe I kind of move to the first set of questions and you know, it’s about shopping first of all, so if I can ask you to describe your typical food shopping trip, how is it like?
Participant: I suppose I’ll go to a, one of the supermarkets maybe like I don’t like Tes… the bigger ones, they’re a bit more expensive, we’ve moved towards like Aldi and maybe Lidl or that because I think they’re all pretty expensive for everything that they sell, so yeah, I’m using like yeah Aldi and stuff trying to, well I find local shops they’re quite expensive as well so I like to check prices I suppose everywhere I go, I don’t like to pay too much for things.
Interviewer: And how many times a week do you go to buy food?
Participant: Well I probably try and do one main shop a week you know, and then maybe just pick up a few smaller things as needed, but maybe try and do one larger shop maybe per week or something or every two weeks.
Interviewer: And how many times do you go for an additional kind of top-up shop?
Participant: Well, every couple of days I suppose, maybe get milk or bread or something you know, that would be the type of thing you would get every few days if needed.
Interviewer: And for the main shop is that Aldi that you use?
Participant: Yeah, well Aldi’s kind of my favourite at the moment, yeah.
Interviewer: And for the smaller shop is that still Aldi or any other supermarket or shop?
Participant: Maybe it’d be the small, local, nearer shops, the Spar and there’s a Costcutters, maybe get some milk and bread out of those places but not much else because they’re quite expensive as well, I just use them for necessities if we’ve ran out of something but not, I wouldn’t use them unless I had to you know, just for convenience I use them.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Sometimes I’ll make a list but just kind of by memory, try and remember what you need and sometimes I will write things down but just whatever I see kind of at the time I’ll maybe buy whatever comes into mind at the time.
Interviewer: And do you write a list at all?
Participant: Sometimes, not often, just sometimes, yeah, not all the time, yeah.
Interviewer: And what’s important to you when you buy food?
Participant: The quality and the cost obviously, I don’t like some of the high prices, I think a lot of stuff is overpriced, yeah, for what you get, yeah, quite conscious about all the prices.
Interviewer: And you mentioned quality, how would you sort of define it?
Participant: More for like maybe, maybe meat products and stuff like that, the quality of the like meat maybe and the fresh stuff, the fruit and vegetables I suppose, the quality of those.
Interviewer: Is that something you look like at the date or the look of it?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: Or both?
Participant: Both, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: And what would you say is less important when choosing food for yourself?
Participant: I suppose maybe the brand names and stuff, it doesn’t have to be you know, a main brand for me, it’s not that important.
Interviewer: And things like the origin and the…
Participant: The origin, I don’t like it coming halfway round the world, I prefer them to use local suppliers you know, I don’t see the need for stuff to come from the other side of the world.
Interviewer: And why do you prefer local?
Participant: Well it doesn’t travel as far, I suppose it should be fresher and I like to think the quality is better from local you know, we should have a lot of good produce in Scotland, especially, instead of having to pay for something to travel from like New Zealand or chicken from Thailand and China and things, it doesn’t make sense to me.
Interviewer: Do you think it tastes better as well or not?
Participant: Yeah, I would say so, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: And what kind of products do you like to buy locally in particular?
Participant: Well I don’t like ready meals and stuff, I prefer kind of just natural stuff and ingredients, I don’t like, I’m trying not to eat too much processed foods I suppose, just more kind of natural stuff I suppose, yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to the store?
Participant: Usually in the car I suppose, probably.
Interviewer: Is that for the main shop or for…
Participant: Yeah, kind of both.
Interviewer: Both?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So the little shops you mentioned like Costcutter and Spar, you also go by car, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I’d probably be passing at the time maybe if I’m coming from somewhere else and I’ll stop anyway, occasionally I’ll walk to the local stores as well.
Interviewer: How far are they from your place?
Participant: They could be, I suppose the nearest is maybe ¾ of a mile, maybe a kilometre say, something like that, yeah, yeah, it’d at that, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you usually when you go food shopping do you usually go on your own or with other family members?
Participant: Sometimes I’ll go with other family members, yeah.
Interviewer: And when you go with someone else how do you coordinate who buys what?
Participant: Well I suppose we just kind of choose our own or decide together, whatever we see, whatever we fancy at the time, yeah.
Interviewer: And another thing I wanted to ask you in relation to this is regarding the food waste at home, how much food would you say goes to waste at your home, maybe every week?
Participant: I suppose sometimes, yeah, I know sometimes, I don’t know, 10%, 20% sometimes, sometimes, yeah, sometimes things do go out of date and they get thrown out before they’ve past their sell by date and not even been used, it’s kind of annoying when that happens, so yeah, try not to waste too much but yeah, it does happen I suppose, I don’t know what percentage but maybe 10%, 20% something like that, yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of things are they usually?
Participant: They can be like occasionally meat, sometimes the cold meats, maybe sometimes, I’m trying to think, yeah, just probably, yeah, just, maybe jars that’s been open for a while in the fridge, stuff like that you know, that you should maybe only keep for a few weeks after they’ve been opened, sometimes I’ll end up throwing stuff like that out, jams, mayonnaise, stuff like that, like, yeah, maybe had a jar of olives the other day that I chucked out that’d been open for a few weeks.
Interviewer: And do you try to avoid food waste in general or?
Participant: Yeah, I would, yeah, it’s, I do try to avoid it, yeah, I don’t like doing it but it does happen I suppose, yeah, I would rather very little was wasted.
Interviewer: And how do you try to save things in you now, from wasting?
Participant: If, well sometimes when you’re busy if you get a takeaway or something then you don’t maybe cook the food that you’d bought for cooking, if you end up you’re too busy to cook and you get a takeaway, sometimes that’s the way things get wasted, so trying not to be too busy and making time to cook your meal is the best way to not waste stuff I suppose.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see, sure, okay, great, is there anything else that you could add to the sort of food shopping related things, food related things?
Participant: No, sometimes in Scotland, well not particularly too local to me but sometimes when you’re out maybe a longer drive near the farmers, sometimes they’ve got farmers little farm shops and things, those are quite good.
Interviewer: Do you like going to those?
Participant: Yeah, there’s a few in Scotland, it’s just like they leave some produce in like a shed or something and it[s just got an honesty box and you pay yourself you know, that’s a really nice thing, yeah, you get some fruit and vegetables, it’s just usually fruit and vegetables and there’s an honesty box and you pay for it and it’s usually you know, fresh from the farmer’s fields right next to it so it’s usually really nice stuff as well, that’s a nice way to get some shopping.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and how often do you manage to get to go to those?
Participant: Not very often, maybe a few times a year, if we’re lucky to pass one you know, sometimes, if you’re in the right place.
Interviewer: And why do you like those?
Participant: Usually it’s local produce and it’s really fresh and tasty, usually, and good quality, and reasonably priced, or usually cheap actually, yeah.
Interviewer: Great, okay, we’ll move now to a slightly different realm, I wanted to ask you a slightly unusual question, if you could tell me maybe 5 words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Yeah, well, recycling I suppose, waste, being charged for them now in Scotland, we pay for each plastic bag now in Scotland, landfill, I know there’s a problem with them, landfill, plastic I suppose, they’re not biodegradable I suppose, I know that’s part of the reason they started charging for them in Scotland, for the landfill, the amount of time it takes for them to degrade or whatever, and there’s been obviously millions of them floating about the country, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember the first time that you came across the supermarket plastic bags in your life?
Participant: Oh well, that’s going back, yeah, I can remember even taking them to school like, forever, people used to sometimes take them to school I suppose, carry your books sometimes, maybe 35 years ago, whatever, more, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember the times without plastic bags you get from shops?
Participant: Well it wold be the, maybe in the 1970s, possibly, I don’t know, I can always remember my mum carrying a lot of bags because I’m from a large family, I always, that sticks in my mind.
Interviewer: But not plastic bags yet, or were they already…
Participant: I suppose they must have been, well to me the first they would be in the 1970s, yeah, whether there was some paper possibly, and boxes and paper bags before, possibly, but yeah, I suppose since the 1970s I would say plastic bags, yeah.
Interviewer: How do you normally pack your shopping when you go to you know, supermarkets?
Participant: Well now I always try and, if you buy these so called bags for life they last for longer, because you’ve got to pay for each bag in Scotland, so I always try and have them in the car, I’ve got some of these ones they fold up into a little pouch or something bags that you reuse so I always try and have some of them in the car.
Interviewer: And what kind of bags are these?
Participant: Some of them are canvas, some of them are the reusable bags from the supermarket type reusable ones, so I always try and have some of those because it is quite annoying being charged for them for some reason in Scotland.  It’s funny when I go to England it’s quite unusual them giving you a bag without charging you for it now, so yeah, I always try and have some of the bags in the car or maybe like in Aldi’s the way they pack yeah, I always try and take some in there or even sometimes if they’ve got cardboard boxes I’ll maybe pack some of the stuff in a box even, yeah.
Interviewer: And when you said you also had some reusable, are these bags for life, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, bags for life.
Interviewer: The plastic ones are they?
Participant: Some of them are plastic, we have a few that’s, they’re kind of canvas material maybe, and you know, they fold up into a little, into a pouch, they fold up into a little purse type you know, they fold up, those are quite handy to have, yeah, because it is quite annoying having to pay for them all the time I suppose, yeah, it does make you think, and sometimes I don’t know, well we had a Tesco there, it’s shut, it’s just recently closed, a little small one but they seem to, I don’t know, they didn’t seem to have many lying about, they made it harder for you, I don’t know if the store was trying to you know, get the amount of plastic bags they used down even although they were charging for them, they seemed to have a lot less lying about, they were at the you know, the self-service things, there seemed to be very few, you always, you were having to ask a member of staff to find a bag.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to take the 5p bags at all?
Participant: Yeah, when I need them I’ve got to, yeah, you’ve got to buy them I suppose, but if I don’t have my own bags with me, but I always do try and have, put them back in the car so that I’ve got them if I’m going for something because it does, yeah it is quite annoying that they charge you for them, I mean even if you get a takeaway like at McDonald’s even they charge you for their paper bags in Scotland, or you get a Chinese takeaway they charge you for the takeaway bags as well, so yeah, it is annoying, it has made people think in Scotland, definitely I suppose.
Interviewer: How often would you say you take single use plastic bags from the tills, how often does this happen?
Participant: Well maybe say…
Interviewer: Or maybe how many bags a month would you say?
Participant: Oh, a month, it could still be as much as 5, 5 to 10 I suppose, yeah.
Interviewer: And is this on the occasions when you…
Participant: When I don’t have my own bags, yeah, or I don’t have enough, maybe sometimes you’ve not got enough if you’re buying a larger shop, you don’t have enough of your own bags with you and you’ve still got to pay for some extra bags.
Interviewer: And you know there are also the 10p bags which are, usually they’re around 10p, the bags for life?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Have you bought any of those?
Participant: Yeah, yeah I have, yeah I buy them, yeah, some of those, although there was something on the, in the news the other week about them harbouring bacteria these bags for life, they’re maybe not so clean you know, if you keep using, if you use them, obviously keep using them and there’s bacteria or whatever off your meat or whatever, they’re not that clean, they were saying they’d maybe harbour bacteria and the like, so yeah that was in the news the other week.
Interviewer: And would you say it’s the reason why you use more the single use bags…
Participant: Yeah, yeah…
Interviewer: Not only that…
Participant: Not only, yeah but it has made me think since I heard that a few weeks ago about them possibly being a bit, not so clean, yeah.
Interviewer: So why is it that it’s the smaller ones that you prefer to take, the 5p ones basically?
Participant: No, I don’t really have, I suppose it’s cheaper but no I think the 10p ones are better bags and yeah, obviously they are reusable, they are quite a good bag I suppose, I do kind of prefer them as a bag, they’re a bit stronger as well I suppose and obviously you can reuse them quite a bit.
Interviewer: And the 5p ones, how many do you reckon you currently have at home?
Participant: Well actually I save the ones, I save them as well, yeah, I put the, I don’t throw them in the bin, I do save, I put them in the drawer, not as many, since they started charging yeah, not as many like, so I don’t know, there might be 5 to 10 in a drawer, but before they started charging you could have maybe, whatever, 50, yeah, because I didn’t used to throw them out, I would save them up for some reason, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And how do you reuse them?
Participant: For anything I suppose, I suppose they were quite handy for anything, anything that needs to go in a bag, yeah, they were used.
Interviewer: For example?
Participant: Just general household stuff, it could be anything.
Interviewer: Do you use them for waste or not?
Participant: Yes, we used them for waste as well, yeah, sometimes when I’m separating, I’ll put my cans and plastics, sometimes I put that into the small one and take it to the recycle bin, yeah, we use it for that as well, yeah.
Interviewer: In your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in supermarkets, in stores?
Participant: It is very important because you do need something to carry what you buy, yeah I mean, it is very important because you wouldn’t be able to manage otherwise if you’ve got quite a few items you know, you do need a bag.
Interviewer: And what if they completely disappeared from the supermarkets, what do you think?
Participant: It would probably cause, make life difficult for a lot of people because yeah, you do need something to carry things you know, if you’ve got more than a few items you definitely need bag.
Interviewer: Do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: It’s 5p for the thinner ones and kind of like 6p to 10p for the thicker bag for life type ones.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this 5p charge?
Participant: I don’t like it, I think they should just put the charge on with the price of the food, I don’t like them charging extra for the bag, I think they should, I think the supermarkets should put it in with the price instead of charging you extra, it feels like a tax.
Interviewer: And do you find its introduction surprising at all?
Participant: Yeah it was, I suppose it was, yeah it was quite surprising.
Interviewer: Why was it surprising, why did it surprise you?
Participant: Well, I suppose it was surprising by the fact that they were going to charge you for it, I know they had been going on about people using too many bags for a few years and how long they take to degrade in the landfill sites and what have you, so maybe in the end it wasn’t that surprising that they did start charging you for it to try and stop you using so many, because I suppose there was millions and millions of bags being used each year by us so I suppose it’s not that surprising.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and actually you mentioned at some point in the interview now but did you know that the charge is also going to be introduced in England just now, in October?
Participant: Is it?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: No, I didn’t know it was going to be, no I didn’t know that, no.
Interviewer: So yeah, from October basically all of the UK will have the charge.
Participant: Is it?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Oh right, I was in London the other week and it’s strange them just giving you bags without asking, you’re surprised when they’re giving you it for free now, it is strange.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what do you think are the main purposes of the charge?
Participant: Well I know it’s to do with all those bags going to landfill waste and how long they were taking to degrade, and if you think about it there must have been millions and millions and millions of bas being used from supermarkets I suppose.
Interviewer: Would you say the introduction of this charge in Scotland affected you?
Participant: Yeah, I suppose people are using less bags, yeah, definitely, yeah, they seem to be using, well obviously they’re reusing the bags a lot.
Interviewer: So did you, were there any changes after the introduction of the charge in your own bag use?
Participant: Oh yeah because I started always taking bags, I always have some in the car when I’m going shopping now, yeah, we always reuse the bag for life that we have, so I always try and put them back in the car so that we always have some, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you store them at your home or in the car?
Participant: I try and store some in the, there’s some in the home but I try and, the ones I reuse, the bag for life ones,  try and always have them in the car, yeah, try and put them back in the car so that they’re always.
Interviewer: And after the charge has been introduced did you buy any of you know, additional bags or did you already have all of them at home?
Participant: No, I’ve had to buy some, yeah, some of the supermarkets there’s been the odd free bags, kind of canvas type bags, they’re quite good, a bag for life type thing as well, but yeah, we’ve had to, yeah, mostly you’ve still got to buy them, yeah.
Interviewer: So is my understanding right so that after the charge you had to switch to using more your own bags, yeah?
Participant: Oh yeah, definitely, yeah, we use much less.
Interviewer: And how quickly did that kind of happen, the change you know, the other position.
Participant: Yeah, well pretty quickly, yeah, after a few months it sinks in that you’re getting charged all the time for them, so it does seem quite annoying that you do get charged for them so you do take your own bags, yeah.
Interviewer: And would you say that the introduction of the charge has changed your shopping behaviour at all, like the type of places maybe you go to, supermarkets, shops or anything else?
Participant: No, I don’t suppose it’s changed that much, no, no I don’t suppose.
Interviewer: You wouldn’t say so, yeah?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you think that you became a more environmentally friendly person after the introduction of the charge?
Participant: Yes, I suppose so, yeah.
Interviewer: Why you’re saying so?
Participant: Well it just makes you think I suppose a bit more about your waste although I always recycled anyway so I suppose it just makes you think about the, I knew about the bags and the problems they were causing anyways so, but it does make you reuse your own bags more and not throw away the single use ones in your general rubbish or whatever, try and, yeah, it has made a bit of a difference I suppose.
Interviewer: Did you notice any changes after the introduction of the bags, I mean you mentioned that people use a little bit more their own bags, yeah, but did you see any other changes at whatever level you know, supermarkets or…
Participant: I think maybe, well some of the super… they’re not as on show, not that I try to use Tesco and Asda so much but they seem to be not as on show as much in the supermarkets, there seems to be less of them available, like you have to ask for them kind of, ask the staff where are they you know, they seem to be hiding them from you.
Interviewer: Did you see any changes in your local area or you know, in the nature or the environment, anything like that, or not?
Participant: I don’t, no, I’ve maybe not really noticed, I daresay there’s maybe some, maybe less lying about the streets and yeah, possibly, yeah, not so many, well a few go about the country or whatever, yeah, yeah maybe, maybe less waste I suppose well with the plastic bags, maybe you see less of them lying about littering the place, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that the plastic bag charge policy is being you know, delivered, applied in Scotland?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, definitely, yeah everywhere you go they charge, yeah, absolutely everywhere now, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think that generally bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in the UK, or not?
Participant: It’s definitely being that way now in Scotland, yeah, you’re getting encouraged to reuse them, yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you feel it is encouraged?
Participant: Just by charging you, it means people, I think most people are the same, they don’t like being charged for them so yeah, a lot of people are reusing what they have.  You see kind of like America, they always use kind of paper bags and stuff, I don’t know why it was always plastic bags in this country, there’s not so many paper bags like, I don’t know, obviously it’s to do with the millions of the plastic bags, that’s part of the reason for the environment, that’s why they’re trying to stop us from using so many now, yeah.
Interviewer: And one thing I wanted to also to tell you kind of, it’s a note of information but also then I wanted to ask your opinion on it, so when the 5p charge is going to come to effect in England there will be some types of bags and some types of shops that will not charge, and these exceptions will be medium-to-small retailers and corner shops, also takeaways and clothing shops, they will not charge, those kind of outlets will not charge 5p.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: And also the type of bags, the very little transparent bags that you can find on fresh fruit and veg and bakery are also going to be free, and the same for paper and biodegradable bags, they will not charge 5p in England, what do you think about this?
Participant: I suppose it may be fairer, there is some items like maybe for bread and maybe meat that does need to be in some kind of bag I suppose, but then again they charge, they seem to charge for absolutely everything in Scotland so I don’t see why they just don’t do it in England if we’re paying for them up here, why don’t they have to down there you know, because they seem to charge for every single bag up here now, I know the takeaways and the small local shops they all charge you, so I’m quite surprised they’re not doing that in England.  I’m sure they charge for clothes, yeah, clothes bags and everything in Scotland, I think we’ve got to pay for it, so yeah that’s quite surprising.
Interviewer: Would you say that that’s the reason you know, the reason for having the charge apply to everything is because if it is charged in, well in Wales it’s the same situation as in Scotland you know, the same blanket charge, so would you say that your kind of support in terms of a blanket charge was it because other you know, other parts of the UK have this blanket charge?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah exactly, because yeah, that’s what I would say, we’re paying for it so should they.
Interviewer: Would there be also another reason, any other reason?
Participant: No, I think I suppose, well I suppose it’s good for the environment so they should have a blanket if they’re going to do it, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much, so kind of moving on very shortly to a different part, I just wanted to ask a couple more questions about the same sort of thing, this time it’s, I wanted to ask you to compare plastic bags charge to other types of charges, the first one is higher fuel duties for environmental reasons, so basically the idea is to raise petrol prices, sorry, the fuel prices to make them a bit higher, slightly higher for environmental reasons to kind of try and kind of minimise the car trips that people make, what do you think about that?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t agree with that at all really, I think that just kind of hits the poor the most, people who can’t afford it so much, I think if they’re going to, they should put a tax on the profits of the big oil companies and the like that’s making the big profits rather than hitting people at the fuel pumps you know, rather than make us pay higher fuel prices.
Interviewer: But the fact that some people may be you know, might be kind of overusing the car?
Participant: I don’t think people over… I think they just use it because they need to use them and that’s just, people are getting about a lot more these days, a lot of people, a lot more people have got cars and that’s just the way the world is, that’s how people get about I suppose, people always seem to be going here, there and everywhere these days, so I don’t know, it’s just the way people travel I suppose.
Interviewer: And what do you think could they come back to the sort of slightly you know, earlier times in terms of lifestyles?
Participant: Well maybe, yeah maybe walk, people seem to travel further these days I think so it’s okay walking and cycling like locally but people seem to travel a lot further these days more often I think, so they need a car.
Interviewer: And what do you think about public transport, using you know, sort of sharing?
Participant: Yeah, I mean if there’s good services yeah it’s great, I like to see good bus services and train services also, yeah, it’s good to have that as well.
Interviewer: How do you find them in your area in Scotland?
Participant: Not too bad, I probably drive, yeah I drive more I suppose than I use public transport, so I don’t use it that much.
Interviewer: Why would you say that?
Participant: It’s more convenient just using the car I suppose, yeah just convenience I suppose.
Interviewer: Yeah, I understand that, sure, and another type of charge that…
Participant: And it’s cheaper, sometimes it’s cheaper than the pub… sometimes the public transport’s too expensive, like train fares and the like, it’s cheaper to use a car sometimes, a lot of the time, it’s another reason it’s actually cheaper, yeah, it can be cheaper to use your car.
Interviewer: What do you think about a charge which doesn’t really exist in the country but it exists on the Continent in Germany and in Austria I’ve heard, it is a little deposit that people pay for plastic bottles and when they bring those bottles back they get the deposit, what do you think about that?
Participant: Yeah, that’s a good idea, I’ve worked in Germany I know we used to put a deposit on our beer bottles and take them back and it’s a good, it’s a great idea, we’ve had that in Scotland, have you heard of Irn-Bru?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well they, it’s been a great tradition in Scotland for I don’t know, maybe 100 years, at the moment you get 30p back on a glass bottle but seemingly they’re going to do away with it this year because people are too lazy to take them back and 30p is quite a lot of money on a bottle you know, when I was younger people used to sort of go about and collect them and go and buy sweets or something when we were kids, you could always, it was a good tradition in Scotland but even that’s, they’re going to stop that this year funny enough and that’s been going on for, I don’t know, it could be up to 100 years, getting money back, so I don’t know if it would work, people are maybe a bit lazy in this country for that, I know when I was in Germany, it was maybe 20 years ago now, but it was a good thing yeah, you took your beer bottles back and got money and if you got a case as well you put a deposit on the case and took that back, so I used to do that then, it’s a good idea but whether people are too lazy or too rich or whatever in this country, but that’s the reason why they’re stopping for the Irn-Bru bottles because people were, they’re too lazy to take them back and they’re just putting them in with their recycling glass and stuff, so it’s a shame that they’re doing away with that thing here.
Interviewer: And what do you think is likely to happen in maybe 10 years’ time you know, after the plastic bag charge has been introduced, if anything?
Participant: Oh I think yeah, people, well there’s going to be a lot less plastic bags being used, definitely, probably millions, yeah, yeah I’m sure it will be.
Interviewer: Do you think there will be any tangible impact on the environment because you’ve mentioned these sort of things?
Participant: Well I’m sure the landfill sites will be a lot less full of them, yeah, definitely, yeah I’m sure that’s happening already.
Interviewer: Of course yeah, great, so I’ll just move now briefly to the last part, we’ll talk a bit about you know, different behaviours and you know we were asking whether you save water and energy at home, could you speak a little bit about that please?
Participant: Yeah, well we try to, yeah, save, well obviously water is still free in Scotland I think…
Interviewer: Yeah, I always forget this, I used to live in Glasgow and I keep asking Scotland about the water.
Participant: Were you?  I mean we’ve got quite a lot of water in Scotland, we’re not bad for water, we’ve got probably the best water, but yeah…
Interviewer: Let’s talk about energy, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, I try to save electricity and gas, switch off lights and plugs, I’ve got some, these standby energy plugs you know, you put say your TV and your box, you put it into this one box extension, maybe it’s got 4 or 5, 6 plugs, you put those plugs into this one box and when you switch your TV off with your remote control all the other plugs go off you know, instead of sitting on standby using a little bit of energy, I’ve got some of those and we’re obviously switching lights off and not using heating and stuff as much.
Interviewer: And why would you say you do that?
Participant: Probably because it’s so expensive as well, and maybe I suppose to help the environment also, yeah.
Interviewer: And is it something which you would say is habitual to yourself or do you think about it sometimes?
Participant: No, no, I just do it by habit, yeah, it just comes, yeah, comes natural to me I suppose, although I used to leave lights on and stuff but now I have over a good few years now, I switch them off all the time, but I used to leave them on but now I think about it, I always switch them off and stuff.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the household waste normally?
Participant: Well you’ve got to recycle it because I think it’s ridiculous the general waste in our local Council is only collected every 3 weeks, now you have a green bin, wheelie you know, these wheelie bins, so you have a green one for general waste and a blue one for recycling stuff, you have a brown one for garden waste, but this year they’ve introduced that it used to be every 2 weeks, well at first it used to be every week your rubbish got collected, just the general ne, then you got your recycling, they gave you a blue bin for recycling and a green bin, then they changed it to 2 weeks and now they have changed it to every 3 weeks, which is, it’s quite a long time, people’s bins seem to be quite full up you know, and so I recycle as much as possible and also the recycle bin is also full up most of the time as well, so I don’t think they’re doing as much as they can to recycle I suppose from the waste in the house, yeah.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to reuse things at home, things like jars or tubs or anything else?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I suppose, yeah, jars, yeah I do keep silly things, even like elastic bands, I’ve even got a wee collection of elastic bands that I reuse, things like that but yeah, jars, yeah, anything that, stuff like that, boxes I suppose, yeah.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to buy things like either eco-friendly cleaning products or maybe you know, Fair Trade organic sustainable…
Participant: Sometimes, sometimes the Fair Trade, sometimes the organic, but I think the big supermarkets kind of overcharge for the organic stuff, I mean it should just, I think that’s the natural stuff, it should be kind of the same price as everything else but I think they kind of try to, I don’t know, charge you more for it for whatever reason.
Interviewer: Why do you think they charge more for those?
Participant: I don’t know, just for their profits no doubt you know, they’re always trying to make as much profit as they can so if they can charge you more for something I think they do.
Interviewer: And why do you sometimes buy those products?
Participant: The organic stuff I like the thought of it, it’s just growing naturally without any whatever, fertilisers or additives or whatever, hopefully it’s better for you.
Interviewer: And does it ever happen to you to support environmental organisations and issues at all?
Participant: I don’t, no I haven’t done, no, not much I suppose, no, not really.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, okay and how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m not too concerned to be honest I don’t think, yeah, I don’t know if they try to scare us with some of the stories, I don’t know, yeah, I’m not, although our town’s quite unique, we’ve got the biggest BP oil refinery in Europe so it’s quite polluted actually, so there is a few funny smells comes out, and we’ve also got a chemical works as well, so there is a few funny smells about our town at times, they should be regulated more I think, I don’t know what they get up to.
Interviewer: And what does the environment meant to you in general?
Participant: Yeah, well I suppose like the countryside and clean air I suppose, and the clean rivers and seas, trying not to pollute the place too much I suppose.
Interviewer: And you know, compared to other issues in the modern society, how important the environment is, things like social, economic, health you know, issues, anything like that?
Participant: Yeah, I suppose if it’s improving people’s health it’s a good thing, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, but compared to these you know, in terms of if you had like a list of priorities how would you sort of organise it, what would be first, what would be secondary?
Participant: Well I suppose maybe getting, trying to get rid of poverty first would be better for people’s health first, would be the main priority, then I suppose like environmental things, yeah, maybe less poverty would make people a bit healthier, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Yeah, and where would the environment come within the list?
Participant: Yeah, I suppose that would, after that, yeah I suppose the environment would be fairly high up on the list, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not, and why?
Participant: Well, I know a little bit, it’s not something that interests me that much, I maybe don’t, yeah, know as much as I should, I’m not, I haven’t looked into it too much, I just know kind of general information about it I suppose.
Interviewer: And would you say that you would like to improve the knowledge or…
Participant: Yeah, yeah I suppose I should really, yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you think are lacking at the moment for people to know more about the environment and probably to be able to do more?
Participant: Obviously recycling’s a good thing, using less energy I suppose, can’t think of anything else really.
Interviewer: And what kind of support do you think you know, do you feel that first of all enough support provided probably by the government or environmental organisations to people?
Participant: Probably not, I think like they’ve had a few scheme like people for a few years they were getting like solar panels and stuff but those type of schemes seem to have been stopped and I don’t know if some green deal schemes, people getting insulation in their homes and, well actually I’ve done some of that work, I work in construction, I do some of that green deal insulating homes about the country, I’ve done some of that for saving energy, I actually do that as a job, yeah it’s a good thing I suppose, it’s all good for the environment if they can save, I know there’s a lot of that type of thing, especially insulating people’s homes for them to use less energy.
Interviewer: Do you feel there is sufficient information available around you know, environment and how to help the environment, or not?
Participant: Probably not, no, maybe I’m just not interested enough but yeah, I’ve not went looking for any information I suppose, maybe there is some out there, I’m not sure, maybe there’s not widely available enough, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And just maybe the last question around this is are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah I guess I am, I recycle, I try and save a bit of energy, I try and drive quite economically I suppose, so yeah, I try to do a little bit, I try to do my own little bit I suppose.
Interviewer: And would there be anything you would like to change or you know, any kind of things that you would like to be able to do that you’re not currently doing, or not?
Participant: I can’t think of anything else that I could do at the moment, I recycle, I reuse, try and be economical with the energy and fuel so I can’t think of much else I could really be doing, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, yeah, great, I think I kind of came to the end of the questions but maybe there is anything that you would like to add or to emphasise before we finish?
Participant: I can’t think of, as  I’ve already said it’s educating people about the environment and recycle and reusing and as I say it’s all a good thing so I suppose the more people are educated about it the better for the world I suppose.
Interviewer: Yeah, great, thank you very much Paul…
Participant: Okay.