Interviewer: So the first thing I wanted to ask you about, how did you find the diary filling experience?
Participant: Yeah, it was alright. Obviously it’s quite repetitive but wasn’t a problem. [Pause] Hello?
Interviewer: Hello, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, sorry. No, it was okay. It was, like I say it was a little bit repetitive but apart from that it was okay.
Interviewer: Okay. And what did you find, what did you like about it and what kind of things you found a bit difficult maybe?
Participant: I wouldn’t say anything was difficult. I mean sometimes [?? 00:44] trying to think, well makes you think about the questions because, you know, just giving a different answer every time or not a different answer but more in-depth advice. Yeah, but it was okay.
Interviewer: Was there anything tedious, that you found tedious to write down or not?
Participant: Like I say some things were, I mean with the recycling and, you know, how did you find your recycling, I mean it’s something we just do as a matter of course now and it’s, you know, it doesn’t really change much. We’ve got small containers in the house which we use for putting recycling stuff in and when they fill up we put them in the bags to go outside then. So, you know, it’s just what we do every day and sometimes it’s a bit hard to just think what extra to say about it.
Interviewer: Yeah. No, I understand that because that’s routine, exactly yeah. No, we perfectly understand that. And did anything surprise you in the diary maybe or not?
Participant: Well [sighs] I suppose it was, at first I wasn’t really 100% sure what it was all about or what the, but I don’t think anything, not surprised so much but I, like I say just I wasn’t 100% sure what exactly was going to be required, that’s all.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. Okay. Well I suppose you had kind of partly, I mean through the questions maybe you’ll partly have the reply to that and also at the end of the study we are very happy to show you the exact, you know, like objectives and everything but we don’t really want to do it in the beginning because that could influence results, so yeah. So maybe like the first thing I wanted really to ask you in essence today is if you could describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Um, it, ooh… I mean what we tend to do is we tend to sort of shop in more or less daily just top up shops really because we have found in the past doing a big shop that we end up throwing out a lot of stuff so, but every now and again, you know, when we need to, you know, fill up with essentials and things we’ll go off and do a big shop then with, you know, like cleaning products and all that sort of stuff but that tends to be now just like once a week now, once a week or once a fortnight. But our typical shop is really sort of deciding what we want to eat, you know, some things we’ll have in the cupboard and then it’s just buying whatever else we need for the next day or two, you know, so that will be our typical shop. And then obviously things which need topping up all the time, milk, bread, etc., we do as we need them, you know.
Interviewer: And then you say you do the big main shop every once a week, once a fortnight, and does it happen to you to go out for like topping up with milk and something like that?
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Or not really or is that…?
Participant: No. It’s, you know, it’s really sort of fits in with, you know, when you’ve got the time available and then also with when you need the certain items so it’s really probably more often on the weekend and we’ll go off then and do, but, you know, it’s, yeah, it’s difficult really because I think we sort of what I call reactive shopping, you know, we have a look and if we’re running short on stuff and we need quite a few items we’ll sort of go off and do a big shop, otherwise it’s more or less, you know, what are we having for tea next couple of days and we just go off and get those bits in. And because we are working then it’s buying stuff for sandwiches and, you know, food at work and then, you know, for the meal at teatime.
Interviewer: That’s great, yeah. And what kind of stores do you use? What kind of supermarkets do you use to buy food?
Participant: I wouldn’t say we use any particular one but we use a variety of them. I think sometimes it depends if we’re going to other shops nearby then we might use one or two of them near to that. Sometimes we’ll go up and we’ll use some of the budget supermarkets, then other days, you know, it might be Marks & Spencer’s, it might be, you know, Sainsbury’s or whatever. But we haven’t got like, you know, one particular shop that we prefer, I mean quite often it’s whichever one’s nearest to us because I think there’s a Tesco’s and Sainsbury’s not too far and probably use those quite a bit for the big shops because of the convenience [?? 06:28]. But really that’s it really I suppose.
Interviewer: And do you take a list with you, a shopping list?
Participant: For the big shops, yes, because I’ve certainly got a habit of forgetting what I went to the shop for in the first place. So yeah, if we need certain items, you know, particular items then we’ll sort of make a list of those. Sometimes the, you know, the list will just be like meat and veg so you just go along and you get whatever meat and veg is, takes your, you know, eye at the time. But apart from that, yeah, maybe on the smaller shops we just tend to sort of have a chat and say “oh what do you fancy?” “Oh I don’t know” and whatever we decide on we’ll just get from a shop. We won’t really make a list for it, no.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you choose food and what is less important?
Participant: Ooh [sighs]… To a certain extent I suppose quality I suppose to a certain extent. Yeah, I mean, you know, you don’t want to buy joints of meat and they’re all full of fat and they’re no good for you, you know, but then I suppose price is another thing as well. You don’t want to be paying over the odds for stuff so I think, and because of the way our family is choice is also a good thing, my daughter she’s got a restricted diet really so, you know, having choice is good, you know. Some of the, like some of the budget shops they don’t have such a good, you know, the stuff they sell is fine but they haven’t got the big, you know, selection you’d have in the major supermarkets.
Interviewer: Yeah. And you spoke about the quality, how do you determine the quality of what you buy? How do you define it rather than determine?
Participant: Well I suppose really if it’s, um… I’m just trying to think a way of defining it really. Well I suppose, you know, if it’s bread, you know, it’s fresh, it’s well baked, you know, well made loaf of bread, it’s not full of air and, you know, it’s a good tasty loaf. The same with fruit and veg that, you know, it’s fresh, it’s good quality, it’s not, you know, I mean sometimes you get some fruit and veg and it seems a little bit tasteless, you know, I mean obviously good taste, you know, and good quality is obviously the way. And, you know, as far as meals and things which are made then obviously something which tastes right and, you know, is properly filling, not something which is a bit tasteless and, you know, and I think as well obviously we try to keep away from junk food as such, you know, tend to sort of try and eat slightly healthier food as well so, you know, avoiding the fatty stuff, the high salts and sugary foods.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel to supermarkets, how do you, what do you take or do you walk there?
Participant: Well the nearest big supermarket is about 3 miles away so obviously we can’t, and public transport isn’t very good so really we’re doing a big shop we’ve got to take the car. But, you know, quite a lot of the top up shops, I mean quite fortunate very recently the Co-op opened up a small supermarket nearby so we can get fresh bread, milk, you know, all the basic stuff there anyhow so I mean quite often we use that, in which case I’ll walk up the shop, if it’s only a couple of bags and, you know, it’s not a problem then.
Interviewer: And do you usually go to shop with other family members or on your own?
Participant: Most often on my own but like with a big shop I quite often then go with the wife and we’ll do the shopping together.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate who buys what kind of products?
Participant: [Sighs] I don’t know really. It’s, um, I think we’re just with each other and we just discuss things as we’re going around, you know. I mean we both do cooking of different types so it depends really. I mean if I’m making a meal then I’ll be saying what ingredients I want and [?? 12:03] and vice versa when she’s making a meal she’ll decide what sort of, you know, items she needs to do it so, and for general shopping we sort of go around and I suppose my wife makes a bigger, most the decisions I suppose really.
Interviewer: And you mentioned some food waste that happens sometimes, yeah, if I understood correctly?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: In the beginning, yeah. What kind of sort, what kind of food waste is that and how often would you say you need to throw things away because they’ve not been used?
Participant: Oh it’s occasionally, you know, things get stuck at the back of the fridge, you know, and people, you know, the best-by date has gone on it and stuff and things, you know, or occasionally in the cupboards, you know, things get put away and they’re forgotten about. But not as much as it used to be, I mean we tend now, like I say we tend to, to cut down on that we tend to sort of buy less in the big shop and tend to get stuff as and when we need it, you know, because yeah, in the past we have thrown out some stuff and it’s, you know, seems such a waste really to, you know, I mean, you know, I mean it’s not good for your pocket and it’s not good for the environment or anything either is it?
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. Is there anything else that you wanted to add to the shopping sort of routine before we move on or…?
Participant: Not really. I mean… I mean, no nothing really I don’t think.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, yeah. Maybe the next thing that we could speak about and slightly different sections so I wanted to ask with a question which is slightly unusual. If you could tell me maybe five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag, what does it make you think of?
Participant: Normally those little thin bags they give out, the ones they sell for 5p in the shop now [?? 14:32] yeah. Probably those.
Interviewer: And what do they make you think of basically?
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Just anything basically that comes up to your mind when you think of those 5p bags?
Participant: Well I know, I mean I have had it in the past where we’ve had quite a lot of them in a cupboard just full of bags, you know, shopping bags and stuff, so no. Yeah… Yeah, that’s it really. I mean just like not much good for anything after you’ve used them for bringing home the shopping really are they? [?? 15:22] Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And do you remember the first time when you came across the supermarket bags?
Participant: The thin ones?
Interviewer: Yeah, basically any kind of supermarket plastic bags, yeah.
Participant: Oh I don’t know, I think they’ve been around for so long. They’ve been there forever. No, I can’t, you know, I mean it’s… Not really, no. I can’t think of anything in particular about it, no, from the first of it.
Interviewer: And have you seen the times when they did not exist yet in supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah. It reminds you when you see the old films and stuff and they used to have, used to use paper bags didn’t they and stuff or you’d take up a shopping bag to the shop always wouldn’t you? And then they started providing those, yeah, so I mean I suppose it makes people a little bit lazy and less prepared.
Interviewer: But yourself personally you haven’t seen those times like when your parents were bringing their own bags or anything like that?
Participant: I suppose I did because I can remember when I was young my mother used to take, she used to have bags in the house like, you know, like a carrier, not plastic carrier bags but like fabric bags she used to take up to do the shopping and stuff so…
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And yourself currently what kind of bags do you use to pack your shopping?
Participant: We’ve got, well if it’s a big shop we tend to take up, we’ve got some heavy duty bags, like a material weave type things or the heavy plastic bags. Occasionally when I’m doing like a daily shop, if I’m coming home from work or something like that and I’ve forgotten to put bags in the car, you know, occasionally I have to get them there but generally I try and take bags along to the shop with me, the, you know, take four or try and keep four or five of them in the car, you know, if I go in a shop I’ve got them there with me. Yeah, and if I’m walking up the shop from my house then I always take a bag with me anyhow because I’ve got them here anyhow. They just become a pain if you get too many.
Interviewer: And how does it, I mean why do you prefer using the big, you know, heavy duty bags for your shopping?
Participant: I do, yeah, I prefer because obviously they’re strong bags and they’re not going to break or anything and you can get quite a bit in them, it’s just easier to handle. But my wife finds that they can get a bit heavy sometimes if they’re full of milk and cans and bottles and stuff so, but yeah, I prefer the big heavy shopping carrier bags, yeah.
Interviewer: And you also mentioned that you use some of the plastic ones, which are they the bags for life or something else?
Participant: I suppose, yeah, you’d call them bags for life, yeah, the thicker plastic bags, you know, the ones…
Interviewer: Are they the 10p ones, something around that?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And you also bring those to when you do your shopping?
Participant: Yes. Yeah, normally like you say I take a big heavy bag and I’ll put four or five of those in the…
Interviewer: Yeah. And what is the reason of using, you know, a combination of different types of bags? Do you use them for different purposes, different, to put different things or not?
Participant: Yeah. I think with a big bag you tend to put all the heavy stuff in it and then the other ones then you’ll have a bag full of like maybe bread and cakes and stuff, and you’ll have another one with frozen food in it, another one with the meat in it. So it’s just about being able to separate things out so…
Interviewer: Okay. Yeah. And why do you like using these plastic bags for life, what is kind of practical about them?
Participant: Well generally they’re stronger, they take a little bit more than the smaller bags and you can reuse them better. I mean I found some of the thinner bags, you know, they’re starting to break before you’ve even left the shop so no the, like you say I can reuse them so it just makes it more convenient, yeah, rather than just, you know, I mean the 5p bags are I suppose okay in emergency but, you know.
Interviewer: And when you say that sometimes you do take the plastic, the 5p ones, yeah, in the shops, what kind of occasions are these?
Participant: Normally when I’ve forgotten to take bags with me.
Interviewer: Would that be for the main shop or would that be for a top up shop or both?
Participant: No, that would be for a top up shop, you know. For a main shop if we’re going up there to do the shopping we’ll nearly always make sure we put the, you know, a load of bags in the car with us and take them up with us.
Interviewer: And how many of those, of 5p bags would you take a month do you think?
Participant: Ooh, probably not many. I would say probably less than ten. Yeah, probably less than ten.
Interviewer: And is there any use that you find of them afterwards or not?
Participant: Occasionally if we’re clearing out somewhere whatever or, you know, you just sort of put a load of stuff away in the rubbish then occasionally use them for that but they’re not much use for anything else, you know, they’re not really that strong and they’re not that big and they’re not, they’re not much use for much else, no.
Interviewer: And do you store them when you bring them?
Participant: Yeah. We’ve got a cupboard which is full of plastic bags and stuff that we tend to keep them in.
Interviewer: How many do you currently have at home do you reckon?
Participant: Oh plastic bags, mostly the, like the heavier ones but I don’t know, there’s probably thirty bags in there.
Interviewer: The 5p ones kind of?
Participant: Oh the 5p ones? Probably a dozen or so.
Interviewer: And when you say thirty or something was it of the bags for life?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So, and how does it happen that you end up with many of them at home?
Participant: I think it just comes down to, you know, you go to the shop, you take, you know, I’ve done it before when I’ve gone, taken maybe a handful of bags and I needed an extra two to get the shopping in there but yeah, so they tend to build up a little that way.
Interviewer: Yeah. And why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well I thought it was because if you take them back to the shop they’ll replace them if they get damaged. So I presume that’s why.
Interviewer: And have you ever done this yourself?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And why was that?
Participant: Well we haven’t taken any back, I don’t know why.
Interviewer: Have you had any of them completely, you know, finishing, breaking basically or not?
Participant: I’ve had one or two where the handles have sort of broken but not sort of splitting and falling apart but we’ve had one or two where the handles have sort of, you know, they’ve gone, maybe just putting too much heavy stuff in or something, I don’t know, but yeah, I have had one or two.
Interviewer: And what do you do with them when they are kind of not very in a good condition?
Participant: They go out with the plastic waste then.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay. And another thing I wanted to ask you is where do you store normally the bags that you take shopping with you and how do you plan on taking them, how does that happen?
Participant: What I tend to do is I’ll put a load of bags in the car and I’ve got them there so if I have to pop in a shop I’ve normally got some available. But the ones at home then I’ve got in a, we’ve got a narrow cupboard which we use just for storing the bags in. So like I say we have them all there so if we need them they’re at hand there.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Ooh [sighs], I suppose… Yeah, I suppose if you’ve got a lot of shopping you need a bag to carry it in, that’s the problem isn’t it? It’s the choice really. I suppose they are needed but, I suppose it is quite important, yeah.
Interviewer: What would happen if they completely disappeared from stores, how would you find it?
Participant: It would be nice if they could offer an alternative, whether they went back to sort of paper bags or something like that, I don’t know. I think it would make people a bit more organised if they went to the shop knowing they, you know, they have to take their own bags and people, I think people will make more of an effort. Because, you know, I think it’s maybe just a bit too easy just to say “oh god, I forgot the bags, I’ll get some more” [?? 26:24] it’s maybe a bit too easy so, but yeah I mean, but it is difficult I suppose if you have got to go to the shops and you haven’t got a bag, then you’re going to need something to carry it away.
Interviewer: And do you know what plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Yeah, it’s 5p for the little, the thin ones and 10p for the bigger ones normally.
Interviewer: Yeah. And what do you think about the 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s good, you know, I think it would be particularly good if, I don’t know where the money goes to, if it went to charity or something or whatever I think would be excellent.
Interviewer: And is there anything else, you know, what, basically what are the positives and negatives of the plastic bag charge for you?
Participant: I think the positives are it makes people sort of even more aware, you know, I mean you go in a shop and you’re getting ten bags and all of a sudden you’re spending, you know, money that you don’t need to spend so I mean, and I think more than anything it just sort of highlights to people, you know, the problems they can cause. And I think it’s a lot better than it used to be for the bags but I’ve got no problem with it at all paying the 5p for the bags, I think it, you know, if you can’t be bothered to bring your own bags along then you should pay it.
Interviewer: And you said that something became better since the charge was introduced, what actually, what kind of changes happened?
Participant: I just think people are more aware now and they’re making more of an effort to take bags along rather than just buying them when they get there. Definitely you see a lot of people going along with, you know, a bag full of bags when they do their shopping now so they can, you know, take the food away without having to buy anymore. Just seems a waste really that, you know, a lot of people have got cupboards full of them and don’t know what to do with them and they’re just buying more so…
Interviewer: And do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising at all or not?
Participant: I don’t know surprising, I mean it was, I suppose it was a bit of a surprise when it first happened but I think it’s a really good idea, certainly when I started to follow it.
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October or have you not heard of it?
Participant: I know they hadn’t had the charge up to now but I think it’s a good idea, they should do it. I mean it’s, I know there has been a problem with the plastic bags going into the waste and landfill and stuff so, you know, I think it’s an excellent idea.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s just to get people to reuse or use an alternative way of taking their shopping away rather than using the bags or buying new all the time or getting new because when they were free people just go in there, take a handful of bags and walk away with them and it’s sort of, you know, one person taking two extra bags might not seem much but I suppose if there’s hundreds of thousands of people doing shopping every day then there’s, you know, hundreds and thousands extra bags going into circulation. So I think it’s very good.
Interviewer: Sure. And did the introduction of the plastic bag charge initially affect you?
Participant: Only in so much as it made me think about I think, you know, instead of just going to a shop and not really maybe making the effort to take bags with you, yeah, it made you think about it. And I think a lot of people all of sudden thought “well, ooh hang on a second, that’s going to cost me an extra 50p in bags and stuff on top of my shopping” so yeah, I think it affected because it made you, made you take bags along and think about taking bags along.
Interviewer: And you yourself personally did you use your own bags before the introduction of the charge or did you tend to rely on the free ones?
Participant: We did but not as often as we should have. Occasionally we take a load along, I think it was more or less because we had so many in the house anyhow but yeah, but not as much and it certainly, yeah, makes you, uh, yeah, I think it makes you think about it more and consider using the bags you’ve got at home because as you say there’s no reason not to use them again. There’s nothing wrong with them so, and occasionally one of them gets messed up, maybe a bit of food spilt in it, something like that and we have to throw it out but apart from that now we tend to reuse them.
Interviewer: And what are the main ways to reuse them for you at home? You’ve mentioned garbage, is there anything else that you reuse them for?
Participant: [Sighs] I suppose occasionally, you know, just for storing stuff like maybe if, you know, you’re putting some objects up in the attic, store away, just move the bags again, things like that. But no, not a lot for anything else really. I mean that would be about it really I think.
Interviewer: And do you remember, you know, when the charge was introduced how quickly did you decide or did you realise that it’s better to bring your own bags, so how sort of how quick or how long was that process of changing the bag use for you?
Participant: I think almost immediate.
Interviewer: Immediate? Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, I think so. I think… I think most people were the same as well, all of a sudden it was like “ooh we’ve got to pay for the bags now, whoa!” and it was sort of like oh right, I’ve got to take them along, you know, and take ones with you so…
Interviewer: Did you have to buy any new big bags for that?
Participant: Well I think my wife initially bought some of the big bags, you know, the ones that you’re paying like 50p for in the shop and stuff, like the heavy-heavy duty ones, you know, so she bought some of those. But yeah, we’re, I think it was almost immediate that we started taking our own bags, you know.
Interviewer: And did it change your shopping behaviour at all the introduction of the 5p charge?
Participant: No, I don’t think so. Apart from taking bags back up with us I don’t think so really, no.
Interviewer: And have you become a more environmentally friendly person after the plastic bag charge was introduced or not?
Participant: I think so. I think [sighs], I think because of that, not just that but other things as well, yeah, I think you are, I mean we certainly recycle most things in the house now that we can do or as much as we can do. And, you know, I mean that’s partly because of the bag charges but also because of, you know, the Council demands on putting waste out and stuff, you know, I mean you’ve got to recycle so much now and you can only put so many black bags out a fortnight. So yeah, I think now you’ve got to be more environmentally friendly otherwise, you know, you just can’t get rid of your stuff. So yeah, I think the charge definitely did.
Interviewer: And have you noticed any sort of other changes after the charge was introduced, you know, in your, in other people’s behaviour, in supermarkets, in the area?
Participant: Yeah. I definitely think most people now try to take enough bags along with them. I think we all forget sometimes and you sort of, you know, end up with shopping and think “oh I haven’t got any bags”, you know, but I think most people now try to take bags along. I mean really because partly, I don’t think the cost is a major factor but the cost makes you think about it, you know, when you’re buying bags and you’re, you know, you’re buying five 10p bags, you know, it’s 50p and it’s, you know, if you’re doing that every week it soon sort of adds up to quite a lot of money over the year. So yeah, I think it certainly makes you think about it.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely. And do you think that the plastic bag charge policy, what do you think of how it is being delivered or applied in Wales?
Participant: Like I say I think it’s working really well. It’s certainly, yeah, I think it’s working very well, you know. I know I do it myself and I see other people doing it, they’re buying two or three items and rather than taking a bag they’ll just take it out loose because they can carry it, whereas before you wouldn’t have thought twice about picking a bag up and using a bag. And I think it’s, you know, you go shopping and, for other things and, you know, you’ll buy an item and then when you go to the next shop for another small item you just put it in the bag with that rather than getting a separate bag and having, you know, your bags for loads of different items so…
Interviewer: But also in terms of how sort of the food outlets or any other shops sort of deliver themselves the charge, whether they, you know, because there are different ways I suppose to apply the charge if you see what I mean, did you notice any?
Participant: Well I’m not really sure what they do with the money they get from the charge and I do, I think it would be fair, you know, that they put the money towards maybe an environmental charity or sort of other sort of charity work rather than sort of pocketing the money themselves, you know. But I’m not really sure because it doesn’t seem to be advertised what they actually do with the money, so I don’t really know.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. And do you know that when, I mean when the plastic bag charge comes to effect in England there will be some types of bags and some types of shops that will not charge 5p for the bags and this will be things like medium to small retailers or corner shops, they will be exempt from it, as well as the hot food and, you know, outlets that sell like takeaways and places like that will not charge, and also clothing shops will not charge, as well as paper and biodegradable bags will not be chargeable. What do you think about this?
Participant: I think they should charge for all plastic bags but I think the paper ones and the biodegradable ones they shouldn’t charge for, they should be free.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: I think it just encourages more responsible, because I mean plastics, you know, I think are becoming quite a problem aren’t they? So I would say that it’s preferable to use biodegradable and paper bags if possible. But all plastic bags whether it’s for clothing, whatever, I think they should charge for it and even from the smaller shops.
Interviewer: And why? Why do you think so?
Participant: I just think there’s no need to be, you know, buying new bags all the time. I mean occasionally, you know, you’re going to run low on bags I suppose but, you know, it’s not going to cost a lot for, you know, if you’re reusing the bags it’s not going to cost a lot to, you know, keep a reasonable amount. So I think they should, or if they’re going to charge for biodegradable ones then they shouldn’t charge any more than they do for the plastic. I’d have no problem paying for, you know, because I just think it’s a sensible use really.
Interviewer: And what do you think about plastic bag charge as compared to other types of charges, for instance higher fuel duties?
Participant: Um, oh god. Well I think plastics are becoming a real problem generally. I mean if somebody drops a tissue on the ground outside it just turns to mush and degrades down to soil eventually but, you know, plastic’s just there and need to be dealt with. So I mean I don’t know about higher fuel duties, I think, I mean that becomes then a bit of a problem because people are paying so much for the fuel anyhow, so I don’t know. I don’t know.
Interviewer: And how about another type of charge which doesn’t really exist in the UK but it exists in, on the continent, it’s a charge on plastic bottles. It’s a deposit actually that when people buy a drink for instance which is in a plastic bottle they pay something like 30, 20, 30p deposit for it and when they bring it back they receive the deposit. What do you think about that?
Participant: Yeah. I don’t think I’d mind that too much. I mean I don’t drink out of plastic, from a lot of plastic bottles. I mean I take, sometimes take water to work with me to drink and I reuse the bottle quite often. So yeah, I think, because you see a lot around, roundabout. So yeah, I don’t know, I think that might [?? 42:44] yeah.
Interviewer: Great, yeah. And the last question about this kind of, around this area, what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction?
Participant: Well I hope it cuts down on the amount of plastics that’s going into the landfill and stuff, I hope, but I don’t know whether it will or not. I think it will have a positive effect, I think definitely and I think once people start taking notice of plastic bags then people start thinking about it for other things as well, so hopefully, hopefully it will all come around pretty good.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah. I just, before we finish I just wanted to ask you also a few questions about the environment and maybe the first one is what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well I think it’s just people who look after, you know, the area they’re in, whether it’s, you know, their streets or their town or whether it’s the countryside around, just people who look after it and, you know, appreciate it because unfortunately you do see some that just they don’t seem to have any consideration for things, you know, whether they’re just dropping litter and rubbish and stuff. Yeah, I mean it’s just having appreciation of your own environment, you know, it’s something that needs looking after and it’s down to everybody to do their own bit isn’t it? You can’t just expect one or two people to be doing, you know, tidying up after the masses so I think, you know, it’s just looking after your environment really.
Interviewer: And yourself, what kind of, you know, things do you do for the environment would you say? What would you classify as something that is, you know, environmentally friendly of the things that you do?
Participant: I think, you know, I’ve got the house quite well insulated. I tend not to put the heating on until it’s really, really needed. I personally will sort of like put a jumper on rather than putting the heating on or something, you know, I prefer it anyhow, I don’t feel that comfortable in a hot house anyhow so, we tend not to use the car as much as maybe I would have years ago. I’m quite happy to walk, you know, a few miles to get places and things. I suppose really I mean of the cost reasons as much as anything as well, you know, you tend to drive in a, you know, a more efficient way, you tend to sort of buy a more efficient car now because of the cost of fuel and, you know, just generally running around I suppose. I mean that’s one of the considerations now when you look for a new car, you know, what’s the fuel economy of it and, you know, like for CO2 stuff because of the, you know, the cost of the tax and cost of the petrol and everything so, you know, it all mounts up.
Interviewer: And how concerned are you about environmental issues, if any, you know, if at all basically?
Participant: Yeah. [Sighs] I think it’s really important. I walk down on the beach quite a lot and you see a lot of plastics getting washed in and stuff and it, when you see stuff like that it does make you start to think about it a lot more because, you know, it’s obviously an issue and it’s becoming more and more of an issue because you never used to see it years ago so, you know. And I, you know, I mean I think things like, you know, house builders and stuff like that should be, have more pressure on them now to build even better insulated, more environmentally friendly houses, you know, and things like that I feel quite strongly about, you know, and be looking for alternative fuel sources, you know, anything which can help really because, you know, ultimately we’ve got to start doing stuff now, we can’t just leave it.
Interviewer: And what does environment, well would you say that environment is an important part of your identity or not?
Participant: I wouldn’t say it’s an important part of my identity but something I think about, you know, and something I sort of care about, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you have any concern about the amount of waste that you create or would you not say really so?
Participant: [Sighs] I think it, I think it’s certainly better now than it used to be but I think, you know, slowly like everything else we’re getting educated and slowly things are getting better. I think we used to put out a hell of a lot more rubbish bags to a few years back than we do now and I’m quite surprised sometimes at how few, you know, general waste bags we do put out now. So yeah, maybe not as much as it used to be, so yeah, you know, if we can cut it down more then it would be great.
Interviewer: And compared to other issues in the modern society, things like social issues or economic ones or health related, how important is the environment and at least of priority for you?
Participant: Ooh [laughs]…
Interviewer: You can, yeah, just what really makes sense to you please share that, you know, whatever the answer is?
Participant: Yeah, I’m just trying to think really because it’s, I’ve never thought, you know, you don’t think about it in those sort of terms. I suppose really I mean, you know, finances and health and everything like that are very important issues and, you know, obviously they impact greatly on your life so I mean, but I think environment is it’s important, yeah. Because, you know, it all, I suppose in the end it all goes cap in hand with each other because, you know, you have money [?? 50:36] like that, give yourself a better lifestyle and a better lifestyle until you see a better environment so I suppose, it’s probably getting up there with other issues, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: Uh… Mm, oh I don’t know. I guess it’s one of these things you don’t know what you don’t know until you do know it so…
Interviewer: True, yeah.
Participant: It’s, I think I know a reasonable amount about the environment but saying that I’m sure there’s, people could tell a lot and surprise me with a lot of facts as well. So yeah, probably not as much as you could do.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: I think it’s a matter of little, little increments, little steps…
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: …if everybody’s doing it and I think that’s the main thing. It’s like, you know, if we all cut down on our usage around the house and, you know, if we all cut down on the, you know, the amount we use the cars now, I think it’s, if we all cut down just a little bit then it all adds up to quite a lot. So yeah, I think that’s the main thing.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you think should be done in terms of improving the information around how we can, you know, help the environment or to improve the infrastructure or anything else, any kind of support from, you know, government etc.?
Participant: Well… Well I think they do put out the odd adverts and stuff don’t they? I think maybe they could push it a bit more to try and encourage people to use less electricity and gas around the house, you know. They need to push it for people to use a lot less of, you know, everything really. I mean because sometimes you, you know, things could slip to the back of your mind when you’ve got other worries in life, you know, so I think they need to keep it at every, you know, the forefront of everybody’s mind really. So maybe just a little bit more information being put out on maybe the TV or the radio or the newspapers or whatever, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And things around legislation or regulation, do you think that would help, or infrastructure, you know, good for people’s benefit in those terms so that they can be supported in their, you know…?
Participant: Well I think infrastructure’s a big issue because certainly in some areas, you know, alternatives, you know, public transport and stuff isn’t very good. So I mean if, you know, I mean if you’ve got to get to work every day and public transport takes you twice as long as it does driving and it costs the same, or in some cases actually costs even more than it does to drive into work, then obviously, you know, I think they’ve got to seriously look at giving people a realistic alternative to using cars.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure. And just a last question, are you happy currently with what you are doing for the environment?
Participant: Yes and no. I think yes realistically what I can afford, I mean I would love to have, to be able to do more but, you know, I mean financially I just couldn’t do it at the moment. But yeah, I mean I’d love to live in a more economically sound house but, you know, at the moment that’s not an issue, you know, I mean not something I can do so, but yeah, we do as much as we can at the moment.
Interviewer: Okay. Yeah, I think this is all that I wanted to ask you today about it. Is there may be anything that you wanted to add or to emphasise at the end?
Participant: Yeah. I think it all comes down, just down to education really and I think to a certain extent forcing people’s mindsets really. I think it’s like with the plastic bag charge, you know, I think it’s something which just makes people think, not so much about the charge but why are they putting the charge in and it’s, you know, it’s obviously just to stop the amount of plastic bags which are going into landfill. So it’s, I think it’s just a matter of really, you know, people being, you know, just keeping, pushing the whole idea. But that’s the only thing really.
Interviewer: Great.