Interviewer: Well thank you very much for taking part in the diary study, we just have an hour to speak about your experiences of the study and just to discuss some of the questions we touched upon in a bit more detail.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So there are no right or wrong answers, just looking for your honest opinions really. So could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, quite easy, easy questions. I don’t know, I’m not really good at speaking to be honest [laughs].
Interviewer: That’s okay, well I’ve got lots of questions to ask so [laughs]...
Participant: I’ll try my best.
Interviewer: Aw. Was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, but not on the questions.
Interviewer: What kind of surprised you?
Participant: Just like what I spend, and like how much waste I produce, or was producing, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so it made you more aware of your behaviours?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Please could you describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: So like how often you go?
Participant: I do it every week, one week a big shop, the other week’s a small shop ‘cos on benefits it’s a bit hard. And I normally spend about £80 on my, one week, and about 50 on the other week, every week.
Interviewer: Okay, and what stores do you normally go to to buy your food?
Participant: Mainly Aldi’s.
Interviewer: Okay, is there a particular reason why you like to shop at Aldi?
Participant: I think that they’re cheap. Yeah, and [interruption], sorry about that.
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: But yeah it’s cheaper ‘cos I can do a little bit of shopping in Sainsbury’s, and I can see a difference in prices.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, like do you take a list with you?
Participant: Yeah, I look in the cupboards see what I need, write the list down, any extras it’s just extras.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you’re choosing what food to buy?
Participant: What do you mean by that?
Interviewer: So like if you’re deciding what food you want to buy, what’s kind of like the deciding factor, if you get me?
Participant: I don’t know really. I don't know, I’m not a very good shopper to be honest, I’ve got to have someone helping me [both laugh], I always take the expensive stuff and they moan at me.
Interviewer: So how do you normally travel to the, you know, Sainsbury’s and Aldi?
Participant: Walk.
Interviewer: Is there a particular reason why you like to walk?
Participant: It’s only a short distance.
Interviewer: And do you normally go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: With someone.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate who buys what?
Participant: Well it’s my shopping, they just help me [laughs], just make sure I get like better value for my money.
Interviewer: Oh okay, that’s good. And how much of your food goes to waste each week?
Participant: Quite a lot, well no, not much really ‘cos my kids annihilate everything, there’s things they don’t like I cook up and then that’s where it does go to waste if they don’t like it, ‘cos I’m always trying them on new things.
Interviewer: Could you tell me some words or expressions that [children shouting] come to you remind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: Waste. But I buy them all the time, like I don't like walking with bags on me, I just buy them in the supermarket every single time. I hate it [laughs], but I do it.
Interviewer: Right, okay. Do you remember like a point in your life when you came across plastic bags for the first time in supermarkets?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Could you tell me about that a little bit maybe?
Participant: Well no, [laughs]. Sorry, I can’t remember properly, I was, I can’t really remember properly, sorry.
Interviewer: That’s alright, no worries. So when you go shopping you don’t tend to bring your own bags, you just buy them in the shop, is that right?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And is that the kind of like single thin plastic bags or bags for life?
Participant: Bags for life, yeah [children shouting].
Interviewer: So is that the same for like a big shop and a small shop?
Participant: Pardon?
Interviewer: You get bags for life for your big shop as well as your smaller shop?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Why do you think that bags for life have been given the name bags for life?
Participant: I don’t know ‘cos they ain’t bags for life, I’ve broken enough of them [both laugh].
Interviewer: Okay. So they don’t match the name [laughs]?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is there any particular reason why you buy bags for life over any other kind of bags?
Participant: Just easier to carry shopping with, and they are kind of reliable until a distance and then that’s when they start breaking.
Interviewer: So where do you store your bags for life [children shouting]?
Participant: In the drawer.
Interviewer: In the drawer at home. And in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Not all important, it’s just about taking your own, it costs too much.
Interviewer: So if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how would you find it?
Participant: Probably it’d save me a bit of money and then I’d have to take my own [laughs], but I do normally take a rucksack as well.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay. And what types of... oh sorry, do you ever reuse the bags for life that you buy?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you ever use them as bin liners?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you use them as bin liners?
Participant: Just easy, and I put in little things in the bin all the time, and then it just gathers up.
Interviewer: Okay, do you know roughly how many plastic bags you currently have at home?
Participant: Currently about 15 left.
Interviewer: And are they all bags for life or are they...?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Interviewer: It’s actually 5p.
Participant: Well I get charged 6p.
Interviewer: Do you?
Participant: Yeah. In Aldi’s.
Interviewer: Oh, oh right, oh. Okay.
Participant: Thicker bags is they are kind of like, yeah, the bags for life thingy.
Interviewer: Oh right, okay, well plastic bag charge is just national charge of carrier bags, and do you remember when you heard about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: I can roughly, a friend told me about them, I just didn’t believe it until I went into a shop.
Interviewer: Oh right, and what do you think about the charge?
Participant: Well I wasn’t too happy, ‘cos it was like 10p one shop I first ever went into for a bag, when they said to start charging but that was a corner shop.
Interviewer: Yeah. So you weren’t happy because it was a bit expensive?
Participant: Yeah, I took the right amount in with me and then they wouldn’t give me a bag ‘cos I didn’t have the 10p for them.
Interviewer: Oh yeah, that is a bit annoying. Do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: I haven’t really noticed.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you think is good about it, versus not so good?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And so did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: No, I don’t really pay attention to things, I’m sorry [both laugh].
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Taxes isn’t it?
Interviewer: Taxes, right, okay. What, just...
Participant: More like VAT, like basically tax, yeah tax.
Interviewer: What, money towards the government?
Participant: Maybe.
Interviewer: Okay. So do you think the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affected you?
Participant: Not really, ‘cos I buy them all the time.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it hasn’t changed any shopping behaviours?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Or the bags that you use, just hasn’t changed?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so basically the only thing that’s changed is that now you’re paying for them [laughs]?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And so do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person since the charge was introduced?
Participant: No [laughs].
Interviewer: Did you notice any changes after the introduction of the charge, for yourself, your local area or the country?
Participant: No, it’s my food shopping is going into the bin more.
Interviewer: And that’s the only sort of change you noticed?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is encouraged enough in your country?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you think that that should change?
Participant: It should do, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, why do you think people should be encouraged to reuse their bags?
Participant: You’re buying them, might as well reuse them.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay.
Participant: Rather than chuck them away, that’s all you’re doing.
Interviewer: When the 5p charge comes into effect in England there’ll be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge doesn’t apply, so for example smaller shops won’t have to charge people for bags, whereas bigger shops will, just interested to know whether you think that that’s fair or not?
Participant: In a way, yeah, ‘cos the supermarkets are earning more money.
Interviewer: So they can afford to charge?
Participant: Oh no, no. No, it should be even sorry, it should be fair sorry, everybody, should be fair, all across.
Interviewer: Yeah, so it’s not fair?
Participant: No, it’s not fair.
Interviewer: What about do you think it’s fair that clothes shops have to pay as well, sorry, have to charge for bags as well?
Participant: No. Sorry, can you repeat that?
Interviewer: Yeah, so clothes shops, they have to charge people for bags as well, do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: Yeah, if one place charges then everyone should.
Interviewer: So how do you think that the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, so there’s a congestion charge in busy cities where you have to pay to drive in certain locations, or if they were going to charge for plastic bottles and things like that, how do you think the plastic bag charge is kind of similar to those things or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it’s just all goes to the same, like the bags, do the government, it goes to the government don't it, or do the shop owners have it?
Interviewer: Do you know, I’m not actually certain myself, I don’t think it’s been made very clear at all where the money goes to.
Participant: Yeah, ‘cos I've seen some shops like every time they sell a bag they put it into charity box, but you know if it’s a legit one or not, never know.
Interviewer: What, if the charity’s actually real?
Participant: Yeah [both laugh], yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think if the money’s going to charity is that different in your mind?
Participant: Yeah, it’d be better, yeah, it’d help out more.
Interviewer: Yeah, rather than if it was going to the shops or to the government?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: Probably just go up in price like everything else, yeah.
Interviewer: Anything else or just price?
Participant: No, just go up in price.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you save water at home?
Participant: I try to.
Interviewer: How do you try and save water?
Participant: I like, ‘cos I’m on a water meter, I mean that’s like using baths and all, yeah, try to as my kids keep flushing the toilet and I’m on a water meter, and they keep trying to turn all the taps on and off so it’s not... at the moment I’m not water saving.
Interviewer: But you’re trying to?
Participant: I try to, yeah.
Interviewer: And is there a reason that you try to save your water?
Participant: ‘Cos I have a high bill, for being on a water meter.
Interviewer: To save money, yeah.
Participant: So yeah, save money.
Interviewer: So is it a habit do you think that you try and turn off taps and things or do you have to almost remind yourself to do it?
Participant: I have to try and remind myself ‘cos I do catch them, that they’re like dripping from the tap where they haven’t been shut off properly.
Interviewer: And do you save energy at home?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So how do you try and do that?
Participant: I try and use only the lights I need, and keep on what I only need on, switch everything else off.
Interviewer: And what are your reasons for that?
Participant: Save on electrics, electricity, lasts longer.
Interviewer: Okay, and again is that a habit or do you have to remind yourself?
Participant: That’s a habit.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you reuse?
Participant: Furniture, bottles, yeah, they’re main things.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of what you reuse them for, like do you reuse the bottles to drink out of again?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And furniture, what...?
Participant: Well I like build stuff for my kids and if I’ve got old furniture, like their cots, I’d take them down and just build something for them.
Interviewer: That’s nice, that’s cool [laughs]. Okay, is there any reason why you like to reuse things?
Participant: No point chucking it out, if it’s reusable it’s reusable.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you have to plan to reuse these things or is it a habit?
Participant: I plan, it depends.
Interviewer: And when you’re sort of in a supermarket doing your food shop, do you ever pay attention to the packaging?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: So the packaging is not very important to you really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you recycle household waste?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you don’t recycle?
Participant: Not really, I should start it, but just easier and faster to stick it all straight in the bin and chuck it straight out.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: I don't.
Interviewer: Do you ever walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you know how often roughly?
Participant: I cycle every day.
Interviewer: Is there a reason why you like to cycle?
Participant: It’s just if I’ve got to do things I’ll cycle, or if I’ve got to go places with the boys I’ll walk, which I try and keep off transport.
Interviewer: You try and keep off transport, is there a reason?
Participant: No, just having a car crash and then it was just your first one, I just a bit wary of them, at the end of the day I’ve got kids to look after, I don’t want to be dead somewhere like, yeah.
Interviewer: You were in a car crash did you say?
Participant: I was, yeah.
Interviewer: Oh wow, and since then it’s put you off?
Participant: Yeah, I prefer to use my bike or my feet.
Interviewer: That’s totally understandable, I think I’d be the same [laughs]. Okay. Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: I don’t know, I just [children shouting]...
Interviewer: Buy anything that’s what sorry?
Participant: I just buy any cleaning products to be honest.
Interviewer: And what about organic food?
Participant: Can you call Quorn mince organic?
Interviewer: I don’t think so [laughs].
Participant: No, no [laughs].
Interviewer: It is nice though [both laugh]. What about sustainable food, so foods that go to protect forests or animals and things?
Participant: No, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Don’t know, okay. Do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we’ve just talked about like saving water, energy, packaging, recycling, all of that, and have you noticed anything about these behaviours like while you’re filling out the diary?
Participant: Not really, only while speaking about it.
Interviewer: Yeah, you mentioned you noticed, was it how much money you spent did you say?
Participant: No, I think it was just, I can’t remember.
Interviewer: Or something to do with waste maybe?
Participant: Yeah, waste has gone down to what it was, I think that’s it.
Interviewer: So you don’t really notice anything?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: To be honest I'd never really thought about it. No, I don’t know, I haven’t really... no, to be honest I can’t really answer that one.
Interviewer: So if someone asked you, you know, what does it mean, environmentally friendly behaviour?
Participant: I’d be like, I don’t know [both laugh].
Interviewer: Okay. And how concerned if at all are you about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m not really.
Interviewer: And what does the environment mean to you?
Participant: Not much [laughs].
Interviewer: So is it an important part of your identity and your life or not really?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Do you think, could you maybe explain why it’s not very important to you?
Participant: I don’t know, I just got too many other things to think about to be honest.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Maybe if I’d have less to think about it would probably be something, but that’s it really, just...
Interviewer: Okay. How concerned if at all are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: Well I am a bit concerned ‘cos money again I’m throwing away [laughs].
Interviewer: So what exactly are you concerned about?
Participant: Well no, not really concerned, no, I’m not really concerned about nothing, around anything, sorry.
Interviewer: So you're not concerned?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. And so compared to other issues in modern society, so just society in general, [children shouting], your family, things like that, how important if at all do you think environmental issues are?
Participant: Not that all important.
Interviewer: So would you say like [children shouting] social and economic problems are more important?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues, sort of in general?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: Do you think that you would like to know more or not?
Participant: Yeah, ‘cos it’d help me understand a bit more.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: No, not the support, no [children shouting].
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of where you might lack some support?
Participant: I’m sorry. [Interruption]. Sorry, can you say that again please.
Interviewer: Yeah, so yeah, so you said you don’t feel like you receive enough support to be environmentally friendly, do you have [children shouting] examples of where you could do with more support?
Participant: Not really [laughs].
Interviewer: Right, okay, so you don’t have enough support but you don’t know where...?
Participant: No, ‘cos I don’t really know much about this, I just never really look it up or nothing.
Interviewer: Are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: I could do more, I’m sure I could.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples of things that you would like to do more of?
Participant: Not at the moment, maybe next phone call I might have.
Interviewer: Right, okay. Are there any of your environmental behaviours that you're particularly happy with?
Participant: Not sure.
Interviewer: And is there anything in your environmental behaviours that you would like to change?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What are the main problems in your neighbourhood if any?
Participant: None.
Interviewer: So there are no problems in your neighbourhood?
Participant: No, quite a good neighbourhood.
Interviewer: That’s good. Is there anything sort of that we’ve talked about so far that you want to add to or say a bit more about?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so we’re sort of coming towards the end now of the interview, I just want to ask you some demographic questions, so if I could ask you for your age bracket, so 20 to 30, 31 to 40?
Interviewer: And you’re male I assume?
Participant: Yeah [both laugh], I hope so anyway.
Interviewer: And what is the highest level of educational qualification you’ve received?
Participant: I’ve done my GCSEs but never had my results, so I don’t know, sorry.
Interviewer: You never got the results of your GCSEs?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. And what is your work status, so full-time, part-time, government or other training scheme, unemployed?
Participant: Unemployed at the moment.
Interviewer: And how many adults live in your household?
Participant: Two.
Interviewer: And are they related to you?
Participant: No. Well it’s my partner.
Interviewer: And how many children live with you?
Participant: Three.
Interviewer: And do you know roughly your yearly household income?
Participant: It’s between I think like six and ten.
Interviewer: Between six and ten.
Participant: I think, I’m not sure.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you own or have regular access to a car or van?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Well that’s everything, so thank you so much for your time.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: There’s part two, or phase two of the diary study in November, do you think you’d like to take part in that?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, great, so we’ll be in touch at the start of November then.
Participant: Yeah, that’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you so much.
Participant: Alright, thank you very much.