Interviewer: Maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how did you find the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It was really, really good, I enjoyed doing it.
Interviewer: What did you like about it?
Participant: It was just interesting to kind of have a look at what I was writing and what I was buying at the shops and paying attention to my recycling and my energy consumption.
Interviewer: And why did you find it interesting in particular?
Participant: Just it kind of made me realise what I was doing and how much I was recycling and if I was being energy conscious.
Interviewer: Was there anything that you found a little bit difficult to write down?
Participant: No, it was all really simple, it was straightforward, the questions were easy to understand, sending the emails was easy to do, so no, it was absolutely fine.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: More about myself, like how much stuff I was buying, when I was buying it, how often I was going to the shops, so that kind of stuff surprised me, it made me think about my life and what I do to recycle and stuff like that, so it was interesting.
Interviewer: Okay, so maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is to describe your typical food shopping trip, how does it look like usually?
Participant: Just planning what I’m having for the week and when people are going to be working and not working and what we’ll need for lunch and just try to get a variety of healthy dinners, so I try and kind of work out what I would need for that and then just go to the shops, just pick up the usual kind of fruit and veg and cooking meats and sandwich fillers and kind of snacks and stuff like that as well.
Interviewer: And how many times a week or a month do you go to buy food?
Participant: Probably once a week’s my main shopping and then I maybe pop in a couple of extra times just to get like fresh bread and stuff like that.
Interviewer: And what stores do you use, what supermarkets do you use to buy food?
Participant: Sainsbury’s, sometimes Tescos and Asdas.
Interviewer: And which was the first one you said, sorry?
Participant: Sainsbury’s, mostly Sainsbury’s.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, so what shop do you use for your main shopping?
Participant: Sainsbury’s.
Interviewer: And could you tell us why a little bit, why did you choose that one?
Participant: I just like that store in particular, it’s nice and big, it’s over 2 levels, it’s got everything that you need, toys and kind of all that sort of stuff as well, clothes and things so I always think it’s a really good shop.
Interviewer: So is this kind of a superstore, Sainsbury’s?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh, yeah I suppose you could call it that, yeah.
Interviewer: And the fact that you prefer it, is it only because there are other bits other than food, or?
Participant: I would say so, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: So do you also when you go to do your main food shop do you also go and get some of the other things?
Participant: The clothes or look at their home stuff or I would look at all that kind of thing, I like going in there near Christmas as well, all the stuff in there’s good for Christmas, so yeah, it’s probably one of my favourite stores.
Interviewer: And is this shop the only shop that you do your main shop in or is there any other ones that you try?
Participant: It’s probably about the only one that I would do my main shop in, the other ones I just pop in for milk or bread if I’m close by.
Interviewer: Right, and how far is the Sainsbury’s from you?
Participant: On my way home from work actually so it’s pretty easy to get to and then get home from work, so it’s just a lot easier to go there, the parking is always better, it’s never fully as busy as the other places, so I just do that rather than going all the way up to Asda which is always really, really busy.
Interviewer: How do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: Just kind of plan it, I don’t really take a list, I just kind of go on memory, I’ll just check the cupboards the night before I go shopping and have a look to see what I need, check the freezer, see what meats I need, what kind of fresh veggies and fruits and I would need and I would just go and get it, we pretty much have the same kind of food in the house all the time so there’s never really anything new that I have to buy, it’s like replacing stuff that I would normally do.
Interviewer: I see, okay, and what is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: Just that it’s good quality, that it’s fresh, it tastes nice and that it’s not overly, overly expensive, but I’d rather get good quality food.
Interviewer: How do you determine the quality, what is important for you in quality?
Participant: Taste, how long it lasts, its freshness, it’s just really like fruit and things, that it’s nice and juicy and fresh, I hate when you buy fruit and veg and it’s kind of out of date like the day you buy it, so all that stuff’s really, really important.
Interviewer: Okay, and what is less important to you for the same thing?
Participant: Less important, I suppose cost isn’t really that important to me, I would rather have something decent, decent quality, so yeah, probably cost isn’t a major thing, I like to make sure that I have good food in the house.
Interviewer: Is there any particularly you know, ways that you use to choose the quality thing, so what would they be, would that be labels, would that be sort of…
Participant: Labels or if my friends and family have tried it, if I’ve tried it in the past, I like to go round and try foods like if they have them like out, how people kind of cook them and stuff in the shop and let you kind of try them, I like to do that, I like kind of brand named tins and cereal, I always think they taste nicer and kind of like their butcher meat sort of thing rather than like own brand meats because I don’t like the smell of that one when I cook it, if it sometimes tastes funny when I cook it I just don’t bother cooking it again, so that’s probably how I would determine if it was good quality.
Interviewer: And how do you usually travel when you do your food shopping?
Participant: It’s allays by car.
Interviewer: It’s always by car?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And is it the same for kind of top-up shopping trips?
Participant: Yeah, always by car.
Interviewer: Are any of those stores you know, the top-up shops, are they somewhere, walking distance from you or driving distance?
Participant: Yeah, they are to be honest.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: Yeah, they are, it’s just my laziness, actually I don’t walk to the shop, I could walk but I just, I never really have the time to do that so I always just take the car because it’s easier.
Interviewer: And how many minutes’ walk would that be approximately?
Participant: Asda is probably like 20 minutes’ walk, Tesco is probably about the same.
Interviewer: About 10 minutes did you say?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And when you go food shopping do you go on your own or do you go with any other family members?
Participant: Mostly on my own, sometimes I take my family with me but mostly on my own.
Interviewer: When they go with you how do you coordinate who is going to buy what?
Participant: Oh gosh, that’s just a nightmare, see when you take children with you it’s sweets and…
Interviewer: Oh I see, it’s children?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Oh okay, that’s different, I mean other adults you know, your partner or someone else?
Participant: He’s a nightmare at times, just shoving things in the trolley so you only spend more money when you take other folk with you [?? 07:48 break in recording] things just on impulse so I try and always go by myself, so there’s hardly any coordination when there’s more than one person.
Interviewer: Okay, and how much food goes to waste in your household?
Participant: It used to be a lot of food if I’m honest, I was really kind of wasteful which was really bad and then I ended up, we got like a food caddy where you can out like your kind of waste and I realised once I started using that about a year ago like how much food I’m wasting for no good reason, so I started cutting down like with portion sizes now, so I don’t make nearly as much food so dinner’s always eaten that night, if there’s only a bit left I’ll maybe give it to my partner for work the next day, but that rarely ever happens so to be honest there’s not a lot of food waste in our house anymore which is really good.
Interviewer: Great, the next question I’m going to ask you is slightly unusual, could you tell me maybe five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Probably essential, you need them for your shopping, not the best quality, rip easily, thin, that’s probably about it.
Interviewer: And the last thing you said, sorry?
Participant: Thin, quite thin, they’re not really long lasting.
Interviewer: Do you remember when you came across the supermarket bags for the first time, the plastic ones?
Participant: Probably like if I’m thinking about it would be when I was doing like your school packs, like if you’re doing things for charity at school and you used to go up and pack your bags, probably then, I think that was probably the first time I kind of really noticed plastic bags.
Interviewer: And were they always in the supermarket when you know, when you were tiny?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: Were they free or did people have to pay for them?
Participant: No, no, you only started paying for your bags a year ago up here.
Interviewer: What types of bags, containers, whatever you use to pack your shopping normally?
Participant: I tend to buy like the 5p kind of thin bags for my shopping unless I’m buying like wine or stuff like that, I would probably buy like a kind of carrier bag for the wine, but I do normally just buy bags when I go to the checkout.
Interviewer: And why do you use those 5p bags?
Participant: Just because I end up reusing them at home, I’ll wrap our lunches in them and take them to work or I’ll use them for like the bin liners in the house, so I do tend to reuse them.
Interviewer: And do any of those go to waste at all?
Participant: Some of them by the time you get home they’re kind of ripped or damaged so they would either just go in, like I’d probably just put them in the recycling, if they’re used for rubbish they’d just obviously go in the general waste bin, if I’m using them for lunches like we normally just bin them at work as well, so they do end up probably just getting binned or recycled at some point.
Interviewer: How many of the 5p bags do you usually take when you go for the main shop?
Participant: Probably 8 or 10 I would imagine.
Interviewer: Yeah, and did you say that when you buy something heavy do you take a bag for life or a specific bag?
Participant: No, I would just probably like now I don’t even really bother putting like milk or bottles of juice in the bags, I’ll just put them in my car, but if I’m buying like breakables like wine or like bottles of spirits or anything I would probably buy like a bag for life or quite a lot of the stores here now do like bags for carrying wines and stuff.
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, the special ones for the wine, yeah.
Participant: I’d probably just buy one of those to make sure that they don’t get damaged.
Interviewer: And how much cost those bags for wine, I’ve never come across them actually?
Participant: I think they’re about £1, or maybe even 50p or something, they’re not too bad to be honest.
Interviewer: Are they better than bags for life or about the same?
Participant: Yeah, they’re kind of like, they’re kind of shaped, they hold like a couple of bottles of wine, they’re like a kind of wine carrier if you know what I mean, so.
Interviewer: Right, okay, I’ll check that out, yeah, and do you kind of take those bags automatically really without thinking or do you need to think a little bit which ones do I need today and so on?
Participant: No, I just probably take them automatically.
Interviewer: And why do you prefer the thin plastic bags as compared to bags for life for your shopping?
Participant: Just because I end up using them for rubbish and they end up getting thrown out, I don’t really want to spend money on something that I’m going to put in a bin anyway.
Interviewer: And compared to you know, some reusable bags that you can basically bring with you and pack your shopping in it and you pay them once and they last for a longer while, what do you think about those?
Participant: They’re good to have, they’re good to use like for, I sometimes take my bags for life like clothes shopping or something or if I’m going to like an indoor mall or whatever, I would take them there because they can hold a lot and you can out a lot of stuff in them, but just never really bother buying them when I go out food shopping for reason.
Interviewer: And do you know why or can you think why?
Participant: No, I think because I just know that I’m going to use them for rubbish bags, I just don’t spend that much money on them.
Interviewer: What do you like and what do you dislike about those 5p bags?
Participant: The quality is absolutely terrible and they rip so they’re not great quality, but for 5p and just getting the shopping home then they do the purpose to be honest, there’s nothing I actually like about them, depending on what store you go to, Sainsbury’s 5p bags are actually fairly decent, they’re not that thin, they’re fairly thick so you don’t really get them ripped whereas if you go to like Tesco or Asda the bags are so, so think they’re terrible, so they’re not good quality for the money.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it’s essential, I think you need to have something for people to carry their shopping home, whether it’s those or boxes or something, you need to have something made available for the customers.
Interviewer: What if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how would you, what do you think about it?
Participant: I think it’s almost like they could give you a box or I know like in Ikea and stuff you have like big massive bags if you, you can use them for your trolley, as long as you’ve got something to carry your shopping in, I hate just like, it would just take ages to unload your trolley and then unload the boot to bring all the food and stuff in the house, it’s always easier to have bags.
Interviewer: And you mentioned the Ikea bags, in Ikea I think you need to pay for them, yeah, they don’t give them for free, so…
Participant: Yeah, I think they’re like 50p or £1 but they’re really, really big so.
Interviewer: Have you ever seen the bags for life that are kind of similar, they’re not exactly as big as Ikea bags but big enough, they hold something like at least easily 10 kilos, 10, 15 kilo bags?
Participant: They’re good, that would be good if you could buy, I’d only maybe need 2 or something of them to do your full shopping, so that would be good, as long as you can carry your shopping in something.
Interviewer: But currently for you, for yourself you wouldn’t consider those?
Participant: Not if the 5p ones are still available, if they got rid of the 5p ones then yes that would probably be something [?? 16:00 break in recording]
Interviewer: And you mentioned that you use them as bin liners, do you also buy any bin liners additionally, the proper ones for the rubbish or not?
Participant: The big bin in the kitchen, like the big is it a 70 litre bin I buy black bags for that, but just like the wee bins like in the bathrooms and the living room and stuff I’ll just use the wee 5p bags.
Interviewer: For which ones, sorry, do you use the 5p bags?
Participant: Just like the wee kind of bins that you have like in your bathroom and stuff.
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, the little ones, yeah, and do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Interviewer: When have you heard about it for the first time?
Participant: Well it was last October when it came in in Scotland.
Interviewer: And have you heard about it before it was introduced or kind of on the spot when you came into the shops?
Participant: There was notices in all the shops, food shops and supermarkets and clothes shops, everywhere, there’s notices everywhere to say it was coming in, so you were well prepared for it.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the 5p charge for the carrier bags?
Participant: I think it’s actually okay, it’s not too bad, I know that the money goes towards environmental issues up here so you know that even though you’re spending the 5p on a bag it’s, the money’s getting used for something good, so I don’t actually mind paying it to be honest.
Interviewer: And do you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: I did at the time I suppose, I didn’t really agree with it, I thought it was a bit rude that you were expected to pay for a bag when you’d been spending money in a shop, but now that I actually know the reasons behind why they’re doing it, to kind of help protect the environment and things like that, I think it’s actually a benefit for the country now.
Interviewer: It is what, sorry?
Participant: A benefit.
Interviewer: A benefit, yeah, and in what terms is it beneficial?
Participant: Well it makes you think about what bags you need and how many you take and what you do with your bags and pretty much you know, everyone now kind of recycles their bags, reuses them for things and takes bags with them to go sort of whatever sort of shopping and you don’t see bags just strewn around the street because people know that they have to pay for them, so it’s had a lot of good changes.
Interviewer: And what is not as good about it, if anything?
Participant: Nothing to be honest, I don’t really see any bad points.
Interviewer: So are you completely satisfied with it, or not?
Participant: Yes, uhuh, yeah.
Interviewer: You mentioned that there is you know, kind of, when the charge was introduced did it kind of affect you, how you were using your bags?
Participant: Yeah, I mean before when I would go shopping I would just pick up bags and use hundreds of bags for my shopping just because I could, and I would double bag things and I wouldn’t really care to be honest because they were free, so I just took loads, and now obviously that you need to pay for them you only really take what you actually need, so it definitely makes you think about your bag use.
Interviewer: And you also mentioned that when you take heavy things like milk and things like that you don’t put that in the bag, you have to put that just in the trolley directly.
Participant: Yeah, uhuh, yeah.
Interviewer: So that you save, is that because you save on the bags, or?
Participant: Just because I’m saving on the bags and because I don’t really need it because they’ve got a handle anyway so I can just carry it in with that, I used to put like packs of beer and stuff in bags and you can carry the box so yeah, I think it makes you definitely think more about what you’re doing and what you’re using.
Interviewer: How quickly would you say and how easily would you say you’ve changed when the charge was introduced in terms of bag use?
Participant: Probably just a couple of weeks actually, once you got used to it, it didn’t take long, so when you get used to it it’s a case of just kind of adjusting what you were doing and what you were buying and that sort of stuff, so no, it didn’t take hard to adjust to the changes.
Interviewer: Did you find it easy to adapt or not really?
Participant: No, very easy.
Interviewer: Has the introduction of the plastic bag charge you know, changed anything in your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: Not what I actually buy from the shops but how many bags I use, definitely, I use a lot less now.
Interviewer: And the types of shops that you were using, did that affect at all or not?
Participant: No, no, because you pretty much, you have to pay for bags everywhere here, so no matter where you go you’re buying a bag, so that didn’t really affect what shops you went into.
Interviewer: Okay, great, right, and what do you think, I mean have you noticed any changes after the charge was introduced?
Participant: Just kind of like less litter and stuff like that, people aren’t dropping their bags, just people are probably more conscious of how many bags they’re taking and people have their bags for life and take them with them shopping now, you always kind of see people with their trolleys that have got their bags and stuff like that, so I would say everyone’s embracing the change.
Interviewer: Do you think that, how do you think the plastic bag policy is delivered in Scotland, sort of applied?
Participant: It’s fine, three’s always notices everywhere to let you know it costs for bags and they always ask you if you need bags and things like that so it’s, it’s just part of everyone’s daily routine now, everyone just kind of goes along with it and knows about it.
Interviewer: Do you find that the cashiers they propose you bags or do they only give you when you ask, how does that work?
Participant: Some do, some don’t, I find it varies depending on, even sometimes the same store you get different kind of responses, it just kind of depends on the person, so I’ve had to ask for bags a few times, I’ve been offered bags a few times, I don’t think it’s a negative or a positive against anyone, I just think that some people are just so used to people bringing their own bags that they forget to ask, and some people just ask, I think it really depends who you actually get at the till.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in Scotland or in the UK overall?
Participant: Yeah, Scotland for sure.
Interviewer: Could you tell a little bit about this?
Participant: Because you just, it’s because you have to pay for them up here, everyone is just conscious of how many bags they’re using and like I said you’ll always see people with their bags for life no matter what shop you go into, so people are very much aware of it and are trying to do their bit, I can’t speak for anywhere else in the UK, I don’t really know how much the rest of the UK charge for bags or not.
Interviewer: You know that well basically the plastic bag charge exists now also in, I mean it first came to effect in Wales and then I think Scotland and Ireland and now it’s going to be introduced in England as well, and in England it’s going to be applied in a way that you know, some types of bags and some types of shops are not going to charge for the bags, these are the things like medium-to-small retailers and corner shops, and also takeaways and clothing shops, like clothing and shoe shops, and also paper and biodegradable bags, what do you think about this way of you know, applying the charge, does it look, how does it look to you?
Participant: Probably not as good as Scotland, I think everyone here you pay for a bag, I think like your kind of small shops or small kind of take-away places you don’t really pay for the bags just now, like kind of hot food, but I mean you pay for them in McDonald’s when you get a drive-thru up here, and even though it kind of seemed unfair at the start I think when you kind of get into the swing of it and you realise it’s for a good cause, the [?? 25:15 break in recoding] going to a good cause, it’s actually a good thing so I don’t know, it’s probably not as good as up here, I think it’d be better just to pay, everyone should pay for a bag wherever you go.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think will happen in about 10 years’ time as a result of plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Probably, I think it’s something that’s always going to be there and if it’s not the same price it’ll probably be higher for plastic bags, it might even be the case that like you said, plastic bags might not even be available anymore, it’ll be brown bags or boxes or the big bags that you need to take with you, so I’m not sure what they’re kind of working towards but I know that the fare definitely won’t be away.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and just the last thing about the plastic bags is you know, if we compare plastic bag charge to other types of charges, for example higher fuel duties so basically higher fuel prices, how does that compare?
Participant: I think you pay enough for fuel these days, my car’s essential to me because of all the kind of shopping and stuff that I do so, and kind of working and stuff like that, so I wouldn’t want to pay a higher fuel price to be honest, I’d rather pay more for bags.
Interviewer: And if we compared it to another type of charge which is it’s a deposit, well it exists in Germany, it doesn’t exist in the UK, so the idea is that people pay a little deposit when they buy plastic bottles for example, not plastic bottles, I mean when they buy drinks in plastic bottles, and when they return the plastic bottles they get their few pence deposit back, what do you think about that?
Participant: It is a good idea in theory, they do that up here with glass bottles, if you return it you get 20p back, so yeah, it could be a good idea.
Interviewer: And did you say that the glass bottles in Scotland…
Participant: Yeah, you get 20p when you bring back your glass bottles, like Barrs Irn-Bru and stuff do that.
Interviewer: Is it this only Barr who does it or is it some…
Participant: It’s just Barrs.
Interviewer: It’s just Barrs, and does this work, do you know people who bring their bottles?
Participant: I mean I don’t buy glass bottles but I used to when I was younger and I used to always take them back, so yeah, I mean I think it does still work.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, great. So I’ll just ask a few questions you know, about the things we discussed, there’s like a list of different behaviours and I’m going to just pick a few of those and ask you, so do you tend to save water and energy at home? Probably water, yeah, water and energy, whatever?
Participant: Yeah, I mean we don’t have, we’ve got AstroTurf and we don’t have any plants so we don’t really use a hose, I try and kind of only boil the water that I need in the kettle and I turn the tap off when I’m cleaning my teeth and stuff like that, so I try and save water here. Electricity, I always turn the plugs off, I never leave anything on standby, I’m always really conscious of plugs and sockets, the heating’s never on unless it really, really has to be, I was at 30 degrees, so yeah, I think I do my bit that way.
Interviewer: And where would you say you save energy at home?
Participant: Just because I don’t really have all the sockets turned on, like I wouldn’t leave the toaster or anything like switched on, the TV’s never on standby, the only thing that’s ever really left on is the like the kind of Wi-Fi really, that’s 24?7, kind of everything else’s off, and the fridge, that’s always on.
Interviewer: But what is the main reason for saving energy for you?
Participant: Just to help the environment and to help with the cost, I don’t really want to pay, like for your bills and stuff like that.
Interviewer: Do you ever use things at home, like objects, whatever, you buy something and then you decide you know, something that usually is disposable but then you decide to reuse it?
Participant: Like what?
Interviewer: For instance jars or tubs?
Participant: Oh right, yeah, sometimes I’ll use plastic tubs like if I’m kind of putting anything in the freezer or something or whatever, I would use plastic tubs again, jars not so much anymore, I used to maybe do that when I was younger, but that’s probably about it, mostly kind of tubs and stuff, if I’m doing a baking and I’m making cakes and stuff like that.
Interviewer: What do you do with the household waste usually, if you could tell a little bit?
Participant: I always recycle so I’ve got a food waste bin, that’s collected weekly, I’ve got a plastic box, that’s collected weekly, and I’ve got like the kind of cans of juice and glass and all that, kind of tinfoil and stuff, that’s collected every 2 weeks, general waste that’s every 3 weeks, I’ve got kind of a garden bin, I’m not sure when that’s collected, I don’t really use it because I don’t really cut grass, I’ve not got any grass, and I’ve got a cardboard bin as well, that’s, well cardboard and paper, that’s every 4 weeks, so I use all of them.
Interviewer: Are you happy with the recycling facilities that the Council provides at the moment or do you think they could be better?
Participant: No, no, they’re very, very good.
Interviewer: They are good, yeah, and for how many years do you have that in place at your home?
Participant: To be honest it’s just gradually getting better and better, the quality of the kind of boxes and stuff, it used to be like bags that you would put things in that always used to blow away, now it’s kind of bins and boxes, so recycling’s been something that’s been kind of gang with the Council for a good few years now, but every year it does get a bit better.
Interviewer: You mentioned about driving, do you drive every day, or?
Participant: Yeah, pretty much, I drive a lot for work and to drop my kids and stuff like that so…
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to save car trips at all?
Participant: To what, sorry?
Interviewer: Does it happen you to save car trips at all or to combine them, something like that?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, uhuh, I try and combine with, [?? 31:54 break in recording] I would try and go shopping so that I’m doing it all like at the one time rather than kind of going out kind of a few times a day, so I just try and get it all done.
Interviewer: Yeah, and you know, regarding the way, how you drive, do you use the kind of, do you tend to save fuel, or?
Participant: Definitely, I’ve got like an economy button in the car that’s always on, I don’t really have the air conditioning on, I drive fuel efficiently with the gears, I try and stick at kind of 50, 60 miles an hour, I know that’s the kind of optimum for burning fuel, so do my best that way.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to walk or to cycle for shorter distance, something like 2, 3 miles or not really?
Participant: No, not really, no.
Interviewer: Yeah, you already spoke about that, yeah, and you know, regarding purchases again does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly products or organic food or sustainable Fair Trade?
Participant: No, I don’t really buy any of that, I mean I do buy the occasional organic product but I don’t really buy anything else, it’s probably something I should look into and start doing I think, I’ve never really bought economy washing powders or anything like that, so I need to maybe look into that and try it.
Interviewer: That’s fine, and regarding, you mentioned organic food, what kind of organic food does it happen you to buy?
Participant: I’ve bought like organic vegetables and I’ve bought organic meat, which did taste, I couldn’t really taste the difference to be honest, I tried, my friend’s got a farm, I’ve tried their eggs which were a million times better than store eggs, so I’ve tried all that kind of stuff, I really need to look into more of the kind of washing powders and stuff that are better for the environment, start looking into them a bit, I didn’t really know you could get anything like that until I seen it the blogs.
Interviewer: Does it ever happen to you to support environmental organisations or issues at all, or not really?
Participant: No, not really, no [?? 34:05 break in recording]
Interviewer: How concerned do you feel about environmental you know, questions at all?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s, they’re really, really important issues, I think we should all start paying more attention to it and the more we do now the better it’ll be for the future and for our kid’s futures as well, so yeah, I think it’s a really important issue along with the kind of other things like the refugees and stuff like that, I think it’s really up there.
Interviewer: And precisely, yeah, compared to other you know, issues in the modern society like social, economic or you know, anything you can think of, health, what kind of place you know, the environment in these priorities you know, where is environment for you?
Participant: Up near the top, it’s probably not something that you can see right now, I know that the refugee crisis and things is really, really important as well and you can sit and you can watch that happening, but you know, you still need to protect the environment and make sure it’s sustainable for the future, because if it’s not there won’t be a future so I think it’s extremely important.
Interviewer: And why would you say that environment is very important?
Participant: Just for the future of the planet, if you want all of our kids to keep living and their kids and their kids and just for us all to have a safe and happy life, the environment, we need to protect it and make sure we do our best to look after it.
Interviewer: Would you say that environment is an important part of your identity or not really?
Participant: I don’t know if it’s an important part of my identity, it’s probably an important part of my day-to-day life, like kind of making sure that you recycle and do small bits like trying to keep petrol usage down and using as little energy as you can just to kind of help, but it’s probably become part of my life that way rather than part of my identity.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to be in touch with sort of natural environment at all anyhow, or not much?
Participant: Not much, no.
Interviewer: Do you live in a very much urbanised kind of context or slightly outside?
Participant: Slightly outside, kind of just in the countryside that I stay.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have you know, some kind of, do you profit off it really a little bit in terms of living?
Participant: I’ve got great views and things like that but I can’t really, I mean it’s just a brand new build house so I mean they’ve taken away fields and landscaped [?? 37:01 break in recording] which isn’t the best, so I [?? 37:03 break in recording] I’ve probably destroyed a bit of the environment by buying a house here, but it’s a lot better than living close to the city centre, you just, it’s just nice to get away from the city centre to be honest.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, of course, and do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: No, I probably could read up more and work out how I can help the environment, protect the environment, and I could definitely do more, I don’t do enough to be honest.
Interviewer: And what do you think you could be doing more than you’re currently doing?
Participant: I could stop being so lazy and I could walk, I could buy better products that are safer for the environment, I could donate to charities and things like that as well rather than just not, reading up on environmental issues all over the world as well, I think I could do my bit that way and at least I would know what’s going on and what I can do to help.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills at the moment to do things for the environment, or?
Participant: Probably not the best, I’ve got enough to do the basics but not enough to make much of a bigger impact, so I think research would be the key to improve.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know, you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly you know, as a person living in Scotland, as a citizen, do you feel that there is enough support from for instance the government in terms of environmental you know, knowledge and skills, whatever?
Participant: Yeah, they’re doing their bit, I think they’re trying to get you to realise what you can do and they do encourage you and you can only do so much at the one time, people don’t like change so I think if you do it slowly but surely then people will come round to the idea a lot better than forcing a lot of things on you at the one time, so I definitely think that they’re doing a lot to help, definitely.
Interviewer: And what can you see that you know, what do you, yeah, what is kind of out here that is tangible that you see that the government is doing, what have you come across maybe recently?
Participant: I think the bag charge is clearly something that they’re doing to try and help reduce plastic usage and kind of waste that way, and they’ve increased the number of times they pick up the recycling, and what you can recycle, they’re really helping with that, and they’re trying to obviously introduce, this is maybe more kind of companies, but like the cars that use little fuel and low emissions, so they’re really trying to do it that way, and I know there’s a lot of wind turbines getting built around here so I think they’re trying to encourage sustainable energy rather than fossil fuels, so they’re definitely doing their but, you can see that.
Interviewer: What do you think about as a person again living in Scotland, what do you think about questions like fracking or I don’t know, climate change?
Participant: To be honest I don’t even really, I’ve tried to understand what fracking is but I don’t actually really get what it is, climate change again it’s just, I don’t really watch much of the news or pay attention to it, I just know that the ice caps are melting and global warming and that kind of stuff, I think it’s something that I really, really need to look into more to actually have more knowledge of it.
Interviewer: Do you think that government you know, provides enough communication on environmental issues or you know, maybe not government necessarily but also like organisations?
Participant: I think they probably do if you know where to look for it, I know that I don’t really look for it that often so I don’t really, I’m sure if you Google it a million things would come up, but I just think sometimes the news just bombards you with so many depressing stories that you don’t really, I don’t really pay attention to it anymore, so, I’m sure if I did there’d be plenty of stuff there to catch on to.
Interviewer: And if there were any communication on environmental issues that would be helpful for people, from which sort of source, for you personally, from which source of source it would be easier to receive it, what kind of media?
Participant: Maybe even like the Council putting leaflets through your door, or if they could have something like on their Facebook page or something like that that you can read, they can give you updates that way, everyone’s addicted to Facebook so if something could pop up on that it could let you know what’s going on and what you can do, I think that would be really good.
Interviewer: So would that be easy if it came somehow within you know, what you’re doing, your kind of daily routines…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …sort of the bills that you receive and things like that?
Participant: Yes, uhuh, definitely.
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, and maybe just the last question I wanted to ask you about is what do you really like about your neighbourhood and what do you find problematic probably?
Participant: It’s clean, it’s friendly, it’s new, it’s fresh, it’s in the countryside, we’ve got great views, there’s nothing to be honest really negative apart from they’re still building houses here so it’s a bit noisy and congestion, especially like in the morning time with all the lorries coming in, there’s no like antisocial behaviour or graffiti or anything, it’s just more living on a bit of a construction site that’s a bit annoying, but you knew that when you bought the place anyway so, it’s not going to last forever.
Interviewer: And how long did you, how long ago have you moved to your new home?
Participant: April.
Interviewer: In April, okay, so that’s, yeah, that’s relatively recent, yeah. I think that this is all that I wanted to ask today, so maybe do you have anything to add or to emphasise before we must stop?
Participant: No, that’s all thank you.
Interviewer: Great.