Interviewer: So to start off with, I guess you’ve already touched on it but could you tell us how you found the diary filling in experience overall?
Participant: It didn’t really give me an awful lot, a lot of, um, there’s a lot more I could have put in. I mean I didn’t realise when you first, when someone first said about it that it was just going to be about food and recycling and things because, you know, it would look as though I’m an absolute miser and I don’t actually, that I don’t do anything but I do. And it really to some extent doesn’t give a very rounded idea of who I am or what I’m doing. And I know you don’t want to know particularly but I would worry a little bit that my answers would stilt the conclusion a little bit. I know you’ve got a load of people doing it but the outliers, the wide outliers are usually a little bit, usually sort of alter the outcome a bit don’t they? Well it all depends if you’re doing a mean or median or whatever answer I know but it just didn’t, it was definitely not written for someone who has poor mobility and doesn’t actually go out to do shopping.
Interviewer: So you found it difficult that…?
Participant: I found it didn’t give me much scope to answer very well. I could only, I mean obviously I tried to answer the questions as they were asked. So often, especially on the Sunday because I had actually, not that I’m getting it delivered til Tuesday but I had actually done some online shopping, with it, as soon as I said “yes, I’d done some shopping”, I then had pages of “did you use recycling bags? Did you do this? Did you do that? How did you travel?” It didn’t give you the opportunity to say “I didn’t travel, I bought it online”.
Interviewer: I see, yes.
Participant: Do you know what I mean? So I just kept repeating myself “I shopped online, I shopped online”, you know, in the little bits where you could actually make an answer. Because I didn’t use any bags, I did shop responsibly as it were because I’ve asked for them to be delivered without bags and things like that. But it could have, it would have been very much easier had it had another option, you know.
Interviewer: Oh I see, definitely. Well perhaps in your own words then could you describe how your typical shopping experience would be now?
Interviewer: I mean what would be your normal routine?
Participant: My normal routine is to, if it’s fruit or something like that because I have very limited mobility at the moment, I’m going to have some of my spine fused together soon so my vertebrae are crumbling a little bit.
Interviewer: Oh I’m sorry.
Participant: I can stand for five, six, seven minutes and I can walk perhaps a little bit further than normal if I’m leaning on a supermarket trolley but that would only be if it was a very small supermarket. A lot of the little supermarkets don’t actually have trolleys, they only have baskets, so I know my local environment and there’s two that I can go to and pick up fresh stuff. I can’t actually park close enough to greengrocers and things like that to go into those. So I was doing my fruit shopping and a few other things actually in person, everything else I would have delivered to the house so it’s online shopping. And it’s always online shopping, it doesn’t matter what it is, you know, I mean my granddaughter’s going to be christened shortly and I bought her present online, I do everything online.
Interviewer: So how often would it be that you’d buy things online?
Interviewer: You know, particularly for the sort of food and…?
Participant: If it’s only for the food, when I need it. I don’t sort of “oh it’s Wednesday, I’m going to do so-and-so”. It’s, and plus it all depends whether I’m going to have visitors or not because I’ve got four kids with all the grandchildren and their partners involved and everything but they all live quite a way from me now. So when they, you know, it’s not like there’s anyone that particularly would pop in every other day or something, they don’t do that because they can’t, they’re all working and things, but I usually have some visitors at weekends. If it’s the school holidays I’ll often have more because they’ll take different holidays off to be with the children.
Interviewer: So it all depends on the circumstances?
Participant: So it really seriously all depends on what’s going to happen, yeah. Or, you know, like this week I was, I had no end of hospital appointments and I spent all Wednesday at Derby Royal Hospital so I really didn’t do anything at home, in fact I didn’t do anything at home because I wasn’t allowed to eat before I set off and then I actually came, swung by through Lincoln and stayed with my daughter that night afterwards and then came home the next morning.
Interviewer: Oh so definitely, you know, depends on where you are and that sort of thing?
Participant: But fortunately I sort of did the online shopping on her computer, you know, logged in there so…
Interviewer: Are there any particular shops that you choose to do your online shopping with?
Participant: Yes, definitely. Tesco’s.
Interviewer: Tesco’s?
Participant: Yeah. For the simple reason, and I only know this partly because I used to be a Social Worker actually before they made me give up work, they are the only supermarket that their deliverers, the people that bring the stuff to your door that guarantee that they will actually bring it in to your house. Everyone else stops at the doorstop.
Interviewer: And that’s important to you with your health I imagine?
Participant: Oh absolutely because I can’t bend down. So if they bring everything in and just put them on the kitchen table then I’m fine, I can put everything away at my leisure, plus they’ve got a brilliant system in as much as everything that’s frozen they put in blue bags, everything that needs to be in the fridge they put in yellow bags, and everything else they put in white bags. So they will always bring the frozen and the chilled things in bags and everything else I ask them not to put in bags because obviously I don’t want to waste bags.
Interviewer: But it’s helping having those fridge and frozen ones?
Participant: Oh absolutely because then you’ve just got to grab things and, you know, what I can do then is I’ll put the frozen things away immediately and then I’ll go and sit down for ten minutes because I can’t stand any longer, then I’ll go and put the chilled things away and I may well leave the rest of it until the next day.
Interviewer: Yeah, which helps you prioritise?
Participant: Oh absolutely, yeah. It’s very helpful, it really is. Everything else I buy is, you know, sort of delivered to the door so…
Interviewer: Can I just ask about the type of things that you buy then talking about the different types, are there any main priorities that you have when choosing what items you buy?
Participant: Are we still talking about food or in general?
Interviewer: General food, yeah, mostly thinking about your weekly or…?
Participant: Right. One of the things I have to buy is cat food. [Laughs]
Interviewer: I see.
Participant: Because I have a very large, very grumpy old tabby, Casper, who eats a lot. He, I know it’s against, this is going to sound strange but I can’t bend down long enough to put a load of cat food out of a tin and then chop it up in his bowl on the floor, I can bend down long enough to put something in a bowl so I use the sachets and he has four of those a day because he’s a pig basically! He’s 18, he’s entitled to be grumpy. And that can weigh a lot that food, it really seriously can. I mean we get or he gets through something like a hundred and twenty, hundred and thirty sachets a month.
Interviewer: Oh wow. So it’s important to you to buy...?
Participant: Well he only like Whiskers and he only likes the stuff in jelly, he doesn’t like gravy, I know it’s fussy but it’s no point, it’s not point for me to buy something that he’s going to sit there and look at me as if his throat’s been cut “oh what you feeding me this for?” you know, he won’t eat other stuff. And I’ve [sighs], I always have the philosophy, well it was my gran’s that you’ve got to eat to live so you might as well enjoy it.
Interviewer: So do you buy yourself the good stuff then, the good foods?
Participant: To be honest possibly not. No, I won’t go and buy Tesco’s Finest or something like that. I’d buy what, I mean if there’s, I won’t just buy the cheapest out because it’s the cheapest. If I don’t like the taste of it, no, I’ll buy something different but I’ve never seen the point in buying the most expensive just because it’s the most expensive, it doesn’t necessarily mean it’s going to taste the nicest or doesn’t necessarily mean that you’re going to think it tastes the nicest.
Interviewer: So we’re going to be talking a little bit about bag use and I understand this is slightly different for your scenario?
Participant: Well no, I do have the bags for life. I don’t use the plastic bags unless I’m actually forced to. Although having said that if I’m going to do certain things, I mean I don’t often buy fresh meat, it’s usually sort of from the freezer or delivered or something but if I do I’m going to have those things in sort of, you know, not just in the bag but in a carrier bag as well because I don’t want, you know, if I’m doing other bits, little bits of shopping or something like that I don’t want it say necessarily next to something that’s going to smell, you know. There’s a lovely little shop in Louth that does all the bath bombs and things like that and unfortunately I cannot take advantage of it because I can’t get down into my bath, well I can but I can’t get back up again so I have to use a shower, but they make very good presents. And so I often go in there but obviously I wouldn’t want the smell of that to get onto something else. So yeah, there are instances where I will use plastic bags but I don’t use them unless I’m forced to.
Interviewer: Well I’ll tell you what, can you give me five words or expressions that will come to your mind when you think about plastic bags?
Participant: Environmentally unsound… Actually they’re an eyesore as well because I, Louth used to, they don’t now, there’s the recycling centre but they used to, you used to be able to take your household waste, this was when I was fit, up to the tip and those things just do not degenerate, they’re there for life. They just, they just, and it’s from the petrochemical industry so it is from the ground but they’re never going to go back into it, they’re just going to stay there.
Interviewer: And that’s a problem?
Participant: Yeah, absolutely. I mean they’re an ecological disaster, they really are. Again, you know, I live in Lincolnshire not far from the coast and a friend of mine works for the RSPCA and you get seal pups that have, well we had one that he’s had to go into a sanctuary because he had to have part of his flipper removed because he got it tangled up in a carrier bag and it cut the circulation off.
Interviewer: So there’s all sorts of impacts of bags then you feel?
Participant: Yeah. So no, I would never use carrier bags if I could help it, you know, not the plastic ones anyway. I really don’t know other sort of phrases, I mean without trying to make it sound a bit inflammatory because I’m very anti them to be honest. [Laughter] I really am. I mean it doesn’t make long-term financial economic sense to keep using them, it really doesn’t because apart from anything else, you know, again it’s from the plastics industry and they use up natural resources that you don’t need. I mean something like cotton or hemp or something, you know, is renewable, you just grow it again.
Interviewer: Do you remember the point where you first came across supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Yes, I do actually. Because there weren’t really such things when I was little, you know, I’m going to make myself sound ancient now, I’m 59. My mum was, sorry to keep waffling to you but I’m trying to put it in context a little bit.
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: My mum was an invalid, she’d had polio when she was 2 so she had leg callipers and things and she couldn’t get around very much at all so my dad was the one that did all the shopping and things. And it was sort of, I’ve got a younger brother but he always stuck to my mum like glue and I always stuck to my dad and I used to do everything that I could with my dad and he, I can still remember he always had this big bag that he always used to put on his back and things when he did the shopping and I can remember going into a shop and I must have been 6 or 7 or 8 perhaps, I don’t know, and we’d bought something and they gave us it in a carrier bag and the damn thing really cut my fingers because it was, and then eventually the bottom fell out of it, you know, so I’ve never really had a very high opinion of them! [Laughter]
Interviewer: I can imagine, yeah. So when you go for, when you do your online shopping you, do you normally ask for particular types of bag? Can you ask for bags of life, do you use those sort of things?
Participant: Normally because I do very, very little it’s, when I go out because I can’t stand very long I normally go to somewhere where I know there’s either a bench outside or say if it’s Boots or something I know they’ve got chairs next to the dispensary and I’ll normally say something, obviously not Boots because they put things in paper bags which is great but, or the medication and things they do, but most of the things because I do have quite a, it’s one of the things “how much more have you got in there mum?” Sort of, you know, the handbag things, it’s not really a handbag it’s a bag, well it’s a large handbag, normally most of the time I can get things in there. If I can’t I do have the odd plastic bag and also a very thin, although it’s very strong, nylon bag that I keep in my, in this bag to put things in and so I normally say “don’t bother to put it in a bag”.
Interviewer: And you always keep those in your handbag do you ready…?
Participant: Yeah, it’s always in there.
Interviewer: Yeah, oh that’s good. So in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in the stores?
Participant: I think it’s a lazy option to be honest.
Interviewer: The lazy option?
Participant: Yeah. I think most people don’t bother about, you know, taking anything with them and they just collect these bags, you know, and they’re just, I mean it’s not just that, you see people going from shop to shop, because what I do sometimes is if I can park in a disabled spot then you can stay there for three hours and so what I’ll do is I’ll go to a shop that’s close by, go back and sit in my car for a while til my back’s sort of allowing me to stand again and then go to another shop, so I do a lot of people watching. And you see people that have gone into this shop and that shop and the next shop and they’ve got a carrier bag from each one of them with one item in, well wouldn’t it have been a lot more sense just to say “oh no it’s alright, I’ll put it in here”? But they don’t. I think it’s lazy, I really do.
Interviewer: Oh that’s fair enough. That’s a valid point so [laughs]… So you might have heard that there is a plastic bag charge that’s coming into effect in England?
Participant: Yes I have.
Interviewer: So were you aware of that previously?
Participant: Only in as much as my daughter told me a couple of months ago. She’s in the, yeah, IT training so she’s an IT trainer for the Sue Ryder Foundation and she heard about it somewhere. She tends to hear about all these sorts of things, yeah so…
Interviewer: And you heard about it from her?
Participant: Yes I did, yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think about it?
Participant: I think it all depends how much they’re going to put, what sort of price they’re going to put on it. Because I know that places like, I mean it, I think it’s coming back again into this country, Netto, it’s like Aldi and Lidl, I think it’s now been bought by Sainsbury’s and they’re going to use it as their cheap brand as it were, they, when they had supermarkets in the country they, this is going back twenty odd years now, they used to charge you if you used one of their plastic bags. And what everyone did then was they used, instead of them folding down all the cardboard boxes that they stacked the shelves with, they used to store these cardboard boxes and use them instead, which in all honesty is a good way of recycling. And it, again it all depends what sort of charges they’re going to make, plus it’s, you know, I can see them not putting too much of a charge on it because it is actually a way of advertising for the shops.
Interviewer: Well it’s going to be a 5p charge per bag. Do you think that will be effective?
Participant: Again it’s, you know, going back many years when this other supermarket, I can’t remember some others, I think some of them did charge, they used to charge 2p but this is going back twenty odd years. I mean this is when, you know, you could get an ice-cream for sort of 40 or 50p, now you go into a shop and they’re all sort of over £1, so 5p actually no, I don’t think it’s very much at all. In fact I’d be quite glad to get rid of the 5p because I hate the damn things, they’re too small. They stick in the corners of my purse, they’re horrible, hate them! I’d much rather people gave me coppers than a 5p piece so…
Interviewer: What do you, so with the 5p charge I mean what do you think the main purposes of the charge are?
Participant: I don’t know. I’d like to think it would be repurposed and used for recycling or, you know, getting rid of some landfill eyesores or whatever but it’s like the road tax and what have you, the government charges all this road tax but so little of it actually goes back into maintaining roads. I really don’t know. It would, you know, I’d be happier to know it was going to go, you know, it’s like the water rates, if you pay your water rates that company whichever one it be they only actually have water related things to spend the money on and it seems more sense to me than actually having to, you know, if it’s a tax, a lot of it’s going to go back to the government isn’t it? And you don’t know what that’s going to be spent on.
Interviewer: Do you think there will be an impact on how people behave as well?
Participant: Oh… Possibly. But, you know, at the end of the day you’ve got to remember that, and please I’m not meaning to be too critical if you are a smoker.
Interviewer: No, no, no.
Participant: But, you know, it’s like everyone knows now how terribly bad for your health smoking is but does it stop everyone? No, not at all. In fact one of the people that I used to support I used to go visit him and I used to knock on his door and shout at him before I went in that he had to put his cigarette out because he was on oxygen, you know, raw oxygen with an oxygen mask and he’d still be sat there in the room smoking a cigarette and personally I didn’t want to be blown up. So, you know, we did it in a friendly manner, you know, I’d say “Reg, put the cigarette out, I’m not coming in til you do”!
Interviewer: But you feel like people now with the bag, like they know it’s bad but they still do it?
Participant: Yeah, they still do it. They’re in, you know, it’s like the, there’s a lot of stuff going round in this area at the moment with wind farms and what have you, personally I don’t think they look too bad but it’s the NIMBY attitude innit, not in my back yard? People always seem to think “oh yeah but, you know, I’m not going to do that, it’s just one, one bag’s not going to make any difference”, well if everyone thinks that, you know. I really don’t think a lot of people think that much about it.
Interviewer: So it will, do you think people will just accept it and move on with the 5p…?
Participant: They’ll be in their own little bubbles, yeah. I don’t think 5p’s enough to make them think really much. I mean if they were doing a really big shop and they’d got sort of a lot of, you know, they were going to have to buy twenty odd bags or something it might make them think but surely if they were going to buy that much they’d have, you know, their own big bags. I mean I’ve got a number of them and I don’t fill them very much because I can’t lift very well so, you know, it’s a case of what I do is I will pack things really well into my boot so that the bags will stand up and then when I transfer them to the house I’ll put several in a little bag or something and carry them in that way. But no, I really don’t think it’s going to make a lot of difference. I mean personally I find it, you know, not just economically but ecologically sounder for me to actually have my stuff delivered because if I was going to go to the nearest Tesco’s, there’s one in Grimsby which is twenty odd miles away from me and there’s one in Lincoln which I tend to use more because if I’m going that way my daughter lives in Lincoln and that’s thirty odd miles away, so the journey there and back is a lot more expensive to me in my car than the £1 delivery charge so…
Interviewer: It makes more sense for you then?
Participant: Yeah it does, plus I don’t have to try carrying stuff from my boot.
Interviewer: Do you think the plastic bag charge will affect you with the online shopping as well?
Participant: A little bit.
Interviewer: Yeah?
Participant: Yeah. Because I have made the choice that I do want the frozen stuff and the chilled things in the different coloured bags that they offer. It just makes my life a lot simpler, it really does. It helps me a great deal. I don’t think I could manage very well if everything just got piled on, plus [sighs], how do I put this? They’re not necessarily that sensible at packing, you know, they’ll have all sorts of things, they won’t necessarily separate the washing powder and the fruit and the, you know, when they bring the rest of it.
Interviewer: So you’d be willing to pay 5p for those bags to keep things separate and…?
Participant: Yes I would, yeah. But that’s to assist me in being independent and managing my life rather than from an ecological standpoint to be honest. I would like it to just be an ecological standpoint, I mean I’ve always recycled, I’ve always tried to do things like that, you know. I mean my dad came from a farming background so, you know, I’ve been always well aware of the land, much more so than a lot of people are I think possibly because my dad was very, you know, right from an early age I’d wake up early, he’d wake up early, if we were on holiday because we did live in a city and if we were on holiday with family we’d leave everyone else in bed and go for a walk, you know, at dawn or something which was great.
Interviewer: So very close to nature?
Participant: Yeah. He had a great knowledge of, you know, this is that, that’s the other, you know. So I learnt a lot and I’ve always tried to teach my kids to do that as well.
Interviewer: Do you think the plastic bag charge could make people more environmentally friendly, more aware of the natural world?
Participant: I’d like to think so but I think they’ll just [?? 32:13] about it for a while and then just accept the fact that there’s a charge now and be annoyed about it.
Interviewer: You think people would change their views?
Participant: I can remember many years ago working as an office junior, one of the jobs I’d have would be to be sent out with post for local offices to hand deliver rather than put in the post and on my way back I would always be asked to, and this was when you were still called, when you were younger because I was only 17, you know, to go into the shops and buy cigarettes for the rest of the office, I didn’t smoke, never have done, and also sandwiches and things like that, you know, the lunch orders and what not. And I can remember a lot of them moaning like blazes about the health warnings that were just being put on the packets because this was when that was coming out, “why, I don’t want to fish that out of my bag with all that on it”, you know, were quite happy for it to say Benson and Hedges or whatever but they didn’t like the big bold, well it didn’t stop them. I can remember the lady that moaned the most, very, very well turned out lady and she actually, I don’t know where they got them but she actually got this lovely little box that you’d put the cigarette packet in that looked really pretty.
Interviewer: So you think people will just complain and find their way around the plastic bag charge, you don’t think it will…?
Participant: I don’t really think, unless there’s quite a campaign and then in all honesty I don’t think a lot of people would bother. We live in a horrible society to some extent, I mean a few years ago when I was still able to go for walks and things like that it was a really muggy night and my son and I, this was before he went off to uni, the youngest, we went up to the local park, it’s a beautiful place in Louth, it’s called Hubbard’s Hills and it’s donated acreage to the town and it’s all built on these lovely hills, it’s like a valley with a river running through it, it’s gorgeous, and my son said he was very glad he was with me because I just got so furious with these kids, I just thought they were having a kick about there, they were but they were doing it with a hedgehog, you know, what sort of mentality is that? How could, if they’d been brought up to respect creatures and things how could they do that?
Interviewer: Yeah. No, that’s horrible. Yeah, definitely.
Participant: You know, I mean my son said “I am so glad I was here” because he’s six foot odd, he said “you can’t just go racing after kids like that”, he said “they’re all as big as you”. It didn’t really occur to me at the time, it did afterwards when he said that but…
Interviewer: Thinking about the plastic bag charge, do you think it compares to any of the other charges, I mean you mentioned the road taxes and things like that, do you think that the plastic bag charge will lead to more charges?
Participant: In some respects I think it’s the thin end of the wedge. In other respects I don’t know how they’re going to get round it to an extent because market traders and things like that, you know, when you’re buying fruit and veg and things like that from them…
Interviewer: Do you think they’ll have to be exempt?
Participant: I don’t know. I don’t know how it’s actually going to work, I really don’t. I mean it’s like the other day I, as I drove to a hospital appointment from one town to another because the health authority round here is, you know, I go to four different hospitals for four different health problems and none of them were within twenty, thirty mile of each other, in fact Derby Royal’s, I, my appointment was 8:30 and I had to set off at 5:30 in the morning to get there which was a bit of a, you know, being diabetic as well was not a good idea first thing in the morning but anyway. I mean there was a lady on the side of the road selling blackberries and she was using bags and I mean I, there’s a second-hand shop, [distracted] oh Cass don’t do that, there’s a second-hand shop in Louth that I go, I tend to donate things to partly because I can park outside it but also partly because it’s set out quite nicely and there’s a big enough space so that if I have to stand or lean against a wall or sit down because they’ve got a couple of chairs there, I can and they actually use, reuse the donated, the carrier bags that the clothes and things like that have been donated in, they don’t use new bags of their own which I, you know, I applaud. But this lady on the side of the road had actually gone so far as to buy herself a load of blank, you know, very cheap carrier bags to sell her stuff in which I thought was ridiculous. It wouldn’t have mattered to me what it was in, you know.
Interviewer: So they should save them? Yeah.
Participant: Yeah. But again I know that the local, because I’ve had dealings with people that used to work there, there’s a local, um, I don’t know what you’d call it. It’s sort of a… A place where a lot of, a lot of adult learning disability people attend and, you know, they’re taught a little bit about horticulture and things and some of them actually do find jobs bless them and some of them it’s just an activity. It’s a bit like a day centre but there are, you know, there are woodworking shops where they do actually sell the stuff that they make like garden benches and things like that and they do actually have a room where they print logos on carrier bags, you know, to make a little bit of money and everything. And everything that they get above cost they put together and they go on little excursions to the coast and things like that and help them run the minibus.
Interviewer: But you’re not sure about the use of plastic bags there then?
Participant: Well I’ve never particularly liked it but it is actually something that once you’ve set everything up it, you know, it’s generating them a little bit of money.
Interviewer: So it did have its uses?
Participant: Yeah. Which is now something that we probably, you know, it was always advertising for people wasn’t it? But I do think that, because I mean I’ve been to America, one of my best friends from school actually married an American serviceman so I go out there occasionally, I’m goddaughter to their, godmother to their daughter so, but, you know, they have these huge and very strong actually paper, sort of they’re thicker, slightly thicker I’d say than your normal paper bags.
Interviewer: You think they would be better do you?
Participant: Oh absolutely, yeah, because they are, I mean they’re not made of anything special, they’re just recycled paper the brown bags but a lot of people do choose to use them because they don’t cost, they don’t have a service charge on them.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely. If I can ask a couple of questions now about your personal behaviour around the household, some various environmental behaviours, so do you save water at home, is that something that you do often?
Participant: Yes. I’m not on a water meter although I keep getting told I should but no, I had one of those, I’ve got an energy saving shower that heats the water only when I need it to and I do have a water butt, well I have two actually, one for my summer house and one from one of the downpipes in the, off the roof of the main house.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And you save energy as well then it sounds like?
Participant: Yeah. Unfortunately I would like to save more but I live in a 1950’s house where the plug sockets are all at skirting board level and they all have, a lot of them are behind furniture or, you know, close to furniture, things like that, but I just can’t bend down to reach so I do tend to leave televisions and things like that on standby because I just can’t reach. Well I say that, I could possibly reach to pull them out, I couldn’t guarantee that I could reach to push them back in again because it would take longer.
Interviewer: So it becomes you can do the things that are convenient for you you would say?
Participant: Yeah. But I do have one of those little thingy’s which is actually by the side of the TV so I can see it that tells you how much power you’re using and that really, when you use an iron [laughs] that really does shock you doesn’t it and things? But no, I’ve recently, and it was well overdue but obviously I had a settlement when they forced me out of work, I renewed my boiler so it’s a much more energy efficient one and I have actually noticed, I’ve had a year and a half’s worth of bills now and I have actually saved almost a third on my energy bills.
Interviewer: Oh wow, yeah. So do you try to make these, you do try to be more efficient?
Participant: Oh yeah, definitely. But again sort of I didn’t want a combi boiler because, you know, I’ve still got, it still heats the water but it heats it in a tank rather than, you know, in the combi boiler itself.
Interviewer: Thinking about what other environmental behaviours, do you like to reuse lots of things, do you try to…?
Participant: Oh yeah. I mean I’ve got an old ice-cream tub on my counter top that I put veg peelings and things like that in, then take them down to, [distracted by cat].
Interviewer: That’s alright.
Participant: Yeah, I do recycle as much as I can. I mean if I get anything delivered I, in those jiffy bags, if the label will come off and things like that I will, I’ll pull them off and sort of keep them and things and reuse them and what have you. I don’t, you know, I’m not particularly wasteful.
Interviewer: So would you say that you try and do as many environmental…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …round the house?
Participant: I mean I do use, because I don’t generate a huge amount of waste because it’s just me usually I tend to use the carrier, the plastic carrier bags that I do get as dustbins. I mean I’ve got a big bin in the kitchen but now that my family’s left home it takes me too long to fill it, you know, it would be very smelly by the time it was ready to be emptied if you know what I mean? So I use the carrier bags and tip them in, tip the contents into the bins, I’ve got wheelie bins and do it that way, I empty the, so that I empty them a bit more frequently.
Interviewer: Have you noticed any changes or have you become more aware of your behaviours by doing the diary?
Participant: Yes I have actually.
Interviewer: Yeah?
Participant: Yeah. It’s been quite interesting to do, you know.
Interviewer: Any particular ones that have stood out for you?
Participant: Um… Just how often, well one of the things is how often I moan about how, you know, I can’t, really some days I just cannot get down to the bottom of the garden near the compost heap but then again I save stuff and, you know, when my gardener comes he’ll put them down for me because obviously the compost heap’s what he uses and it’s just me being environmentally friendly and also that I don’t like the compost stuff that you buy from the garden centres and things because they’re digging up all the peat and things that, you know, really ought to stay where it is. But yeah, I have sort of, I’ve realised actually, one of the things is I’ve realised how little I actually do.
Interviewer: Oh it’s made you want to do more would you say, or just to recognise what you do?
Participant: Well one of the things that bugs me the most around here is that although we’ve got, I’ve got three bins, one’s for garden refuse which we have to pay a charge of £25 a year to have it emptied, and then I’ve got two others that are emptied bi-weekly and one is for household and the other is for recyclable things. They’ll recycle plastic but they won’t recycle glass, don’t ask me why, it sounds, it’s so stupid because, you know, there is a specific gravity, you know, they put a lot of these things in, you know, anything that’s in a bin they can put in water and they’ll float to different heights or whatever, you know, I don’t see why they don’t recycle glass but they don’t. They do have bottle banks in a lot of the big supermarkets but that also means you’ve actually got to keep collecting your glass until you go there, which I do infrequently, and also then get out of your car and carry it all over there.
Interviewer: So you feel like there should be some more support for this sort of thing?
Participant: Well it’s not just that, it’s the fact that if you do have a bag or a box full of glass you tend to find that by the time you’ve got to where you’re taking it something’s been tipped or smashed or something and you end up cutting your hand. So it does bug me a great deal. What I tend to do now is I’ll collect it in a, again now that I’ve got little grandchildren I have to be very careful where I put it because I can’t, what I used to do was keep them in a bag or a box or something in the lobby next to the front door so that, you know, whichever of my kids tend to visit, [distracted by cat]. Would then take them away and put them in the recycle dustbins for me but I can’t do that now because the first thing the grandchildren do when they sort of open the front door is start destroying the place [laughs] as grandchildren do because they’re all, you know, and we’ve got five of them now and the oldest’s 5 and the rest are 3, 2 year olds and…
Interviewer: So you have to be careful with the bins then? Yeah.
Participant: And one that’s just 3 months old and there’s another on the way. My children all seem to have decided to breed at the same time! So this house is getting steadily fuller and fuller of toys.
Interviewer: So would you, I mean from what you’ve been talking about now it sounds like you are, you’d say that you are quite concerned with environmental issues, would that be right?
Participant: Yes. Especially now with not just children but grandchildren, you know, it makes me wonder what the world’s going to be like when they’re my age, it really does.
Interviewer: So would you say that you’re concerned about the environment because of the future generations?
Participant: Well partly but I don’t want this to sound as though I’m [sighs] whatever but I know we’re the higher primate as it were but personally I don’t think it gives us any more right to be on this planet than any other creature and, you know, with the amount of creatures that are being obliterated, some of them from the rainforest before they’ve even been discovered I would imagine, you know, I mean people are going on about things like the cure for cancer but how do you know someone hasn’t just destroyed it? You know, it’s…
Interviewer: So you need to place a higher priority on environmental…?
Participant: Exactly, yeah. Because it really doesn’t look like anytime soon we’re going to be able to get into spaceships and blast off to a nice virgin new world and leave this one that we’ve just wrecked behind does it? And I don’t honestly think, you know, I mean everyone’s going on about they’re beginning to find proof of life on, or proof of the possibility of life on other planets and things like that but, and intelligence of course is also measured in very different ways but how do we know that there’s anyone else or anything else like that out there like us? Why is it our job to be destroying the world?
Interviewer: So you think it has to come first that we protect the planet and then we can deal with say social and economic issues?
Participant: Personally I don’t think we have the right to go to any other planet or anything else like that until we know how to manage a planet and we’re going to have to learn that here. I mean I do try to [?? 53:14] people even though I’ve got very much less funds now because I’m not actually old enough to retire properly but I do give to Oxfam and the Red Cross and also the World Wildlife Fund and a cancer charity as well monthly. I don’t believe in just the odd donation when there’s an appeal, I think if you’re going to support something or someone you do it continually. So yeah, I do do those.
Interviewer: So it’s a mix of charities that you support?
Participant: Yeah. I mean I have been out, you know, and I have been on a lorry or couple of lorry convoys over to Romania and everything many, many years ago before my kids were born when there were those crises and things, stayed out there for a few months helping out and things. I have done those sort of things and I know it’s [sighs], someone said to me “is your faith really strong?” and in all honesty I wouldn’t like to call myself an atheist because I’d like to believe there’s something more than we are but I’m a little bit too much of a scientific lean to be able to do that on faith alone rather than have a little bit of proof. And the definition of faith is actually being able to believe something without any proof isn’t it? So I don’t know. I do think that if there was someone looking down on us he wouldn’t be very pleased.
Interviewer: Coming back to looking about environmental issues, do you feel like you have enough knowledge about what you could do to be more pro-environmental?
Participant: No, probably not.
Interviewer: Would there be certain areas you’d like a bit more information on or you think you’d like to know more about?
Participant: Oh I feel a little, [distracted by cat]. One of my joys if you like because I can’t do an awful lot, even though I love gardening I can’t garden or anything because of my mobility issues, I love to make jewellery. Well of course when you consider making jewellery and I buy gemstones and do silverwork and things like that because I can do that sitting down and I can do it and then I can leave it and it’s not something that spoils. I’ve tried doing painting and things like that but, you know, I don’t like all the paints, I don’t get on with them very well but you can’t really do watercolours in stages that well because the colours bleed into each other and, you know, once you’ve let it all dry it’s very difficult to make it look how you want it to when you start up again. So jewellery and things is something where I can be creative and where I can, you know, I don’t like using the glass beads and things, I like using the gemstones.
Interviewer: So you feel like you can do those things?
Participant: Well I do, yes, but when you think about it how are they found? They’re found in third world countries by destroying the environment.
Interviewer: So does that make you question what you do or are you…?
Participant: It does to an extent. And I know that... That I don’t have any power of, you know, they’re going to dig them up anyway but [sighs] I don’t know, it still makes me wonder because they do destroy, I mean some of them are just found in mines that are dug really deep and they don’t really have much impact, you know, on the surroundings, they’re just discovered and brought to the surface and everything but some others, and I tend not to particularly use the gold and silver because the mines that they have for gold and silver nowadays are just basically they just blast it out the ground. But it does make me wonder sometimes and I don’t know how the gemstones are actually mined, you know, I would like to know a little bit more about that.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely. I’m moving to a slightly different topic but thinking about your own environment and your own neighbourhood, how would you rate that? Are there any problems in your neighbourhood that you would say?
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Apart from obviously the unfortunate hedgehog!
Participant: Yeah. Louth’s a, well it’s Louth and Lincolnshire, Louth is an old market town. It’s got the highest gothic spire of a church in England and it’s a very Georgian sort of looking town. The streets are very narrow in places and there’s, it’s a dormitory town as well for Lincoln and Grimsby and places like that and it’s [sighs], there is, there are a number of people with a lot of money here because it’s a farming surroundings but there’s also a lot of people that haven’t. It’s just like a place of two halves and there is a, and again I’m not trying to be judgemental or anything because I supported an awful lot of people on the, you know, in this housing, but there is on the other side of Louth and when I moved to Louth I didn’t know which side I was moving to so I didn’t make a conscious choice or anything, I just found a house that was suitable for myself and my children after my husband did the departing act and, but on the other side of Louth there is quite a large Council estate for a place this size, for a town this size, there’s a lot of Council housing. And there’s one or two bits where the Council has chosen shall we put it to put all the people that cause them trouble in the same place and you wouldn’t want to walk down there at night.
Interviewer: So there’s some areas of the local place that you’d maybe you try to avoid a little?
Participant: I actually many years ago had a, because being a single mum I got my kids all mobile phones and things partly so that they could always contact me but partly also so that I could still keep contact with them. And I had a phone call at 11 o’clock one night from one of my sons who was I think 16, 17 at the time and it was school holidays so, you know, he’d been, they were actually having a night staying at some mates. They often did that here, you know, there’d be half a dozen of them come round and I’d vacate the room and they’d watch the football and what have you and I wouldn’t interfere, and then they’d all have sleeping bags and sleep in the room. But he rang me and he said “mum can you come and get me?” He and his friend had walked over to the local fish and chip shop or something like that and there’d been this crowd of lads who’d chased them, they’d managed to get away from them but the kids were wanting to steal their mobile phones and things, and Christian and his friend had actually hidden behind a wall and he daren’t come out. So I just drove round and picked them up.
Interviewer: So definitely some issues with them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah. I’m afraid…
Participant: They need more CCTV in Louth now.
Interviewer: Yeah. I’m afraid we’re almost out of time so…
Participant: I do apologise. I’ve waffled haven’t I? [Laughter]
Interviewer: Well thank you very much for giving a good talk about the environment and talking about your shopping habits.