Interviewer: Well thank you very much for taking part, first of all, it’s a huge help. Are there any questions before we start?
Participant: No, it’s all good.
Interviewer: No, good stuff. Okay, so first off how did you find filling out the diary?
Participant: How did I find filling out the diary? Well, I found it pretty easy since I was not at home.
Interviewer: Oh really?
Participant: So yes, it was quite easy to fill out the diary. It was very straightforward.
Interviewer: Yes? Oh good stuff. Did you find anything difficult?
Participant: Nope, nothing.
Interviewer: Did you find anything surprising when you were filling it in?
Participant: No, it seemed fairly obvious.
Interviewer: And nothing that you found any difficulty answering, or unclear?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No? Good stuff. Alright, well thank you very much. So first off we’re going to be talking a little bit about the shopping routines, so could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: For the, for the first, for the task?
Interviewer: Well just in general.
Participant: In general, I choose to find healthy, tasty food, and stuff like that, yes. I choose to not buy, so, like, when I buy food I buy, like, fresh produce all the time, I don’t buy processed food.
Interviewer: Alright. Is that for health reasons?
Participant: It’s just because it tastes better.
Interviewer: Makes sense. So it’s health and, sort of, the higher quality ones would you say?
Participant: Yes, pretty much.
Interviewer: Whereabouts do you normally do your food shopping?
Participant: A mixture of places. Like, I use Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Morrison’s, a whole bunch of other little shops around town.
Interviewer: So it’s a real mix of independent and larger shops?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is that for any reason?
Participant: Not really, it’s just because it’s there.
Interviewer: Are there any particular shops that you go to for particular products?
Participant: I usually specifically go to Indian supermarkets for all of my spices.
Interviewer: Ah right, you’re a fan of curry?
Participant: I’m a big fan of curry.
Interviewer: So how frequently would you say you go shopping for food?
Participant: Just as and when I need it. I usually, like, buy food every other couple of days. I buy in small amounts, not large amounts, because it’s always going to be fresher that way, and it’s only two of us, so we don’t really need a big, massive shop.
Interviewer: How do you normally get to the shops?
Participant: If we’re doing a big shop for, like, other household goods, like, cleaning products and, you know, big bulky things, then we’ll go by car, but generally I’ll cycle or walk.
Interviewer: How far is it to get to the shops, normally?
Participant: It depends which ones we go to. So there are shops, like, half a mile away to, if it’s a big shop then it’s, like, maybe a couple of miles away.
Interviewer: When you walk and cycle it’s, what, a couple of miles would you go?
Participant: Yes, up to a couple of miles.
Interviewer: Okay. It sounds like it’s quite important, then, to choose the right store for the right food.
Participant: Not really. Like, most stores, they’re all much of a muchness, but there are some stores that have better quality food and some stores that just don’t have what you’re looking for. So I suppose in that respect then yes, it is important to choose the right store for the right food.
Interviewer: Do you often go shopping with someone else or is it by yourself?
Participant: Mostly myself and my partner, but a lot of the time by myself.
Interviewer: Are those the smaller shopping trips that you do by yourself?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is it easier, would you say?
Participant: Yes, well it’s just me and my bike and my backpack, and that’s all I need.
Interviewer: Fair enough. So you buy lots of, it sounds like you buy lots of frequent trips to get the individual, sort of, fresh goods. So would you say there’s much wastage in your house?
Participant: There generally tends not to be much wastage, because we only buy little amounts. Anything we don’t eat we put in the freezer.
Interviewer: Oh, so you keep it then, for rainy days?
Participant: Well, if I make, like, a big lasagne that’s for, like, six, then I’ve got another bunch of days’ worth of food.
Interviewer: Planning ahead, sort of thing?
Participant: Well, not really. It’s just there. You know.
Interviewer: Do you take shopping lists when you go shopping at all?
Participant: Actually yes, when I decide that I’m going to cook a specific thing, if I get bored of my normal routine, so I’ll look up various different recipes for different things, and I’ll generally stick to the recipe but change it slightly because, well...
Interviewer: Where do you get your recipes, if I can ask?
Participant: Mostly online from various different sites.
Interviewer: So it sounds like lots of small frequent trips to get the fresh goods and that sort of thing. So we’ll talk quickly now about some bag use. So could you tell me five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Good bin liner. Not very good on trees. Kills birds. Get swallowed by fish. Don’t really like them.
Interviewer: Yes, you sound quite negative about them.
Participant: Yes, well I’ve got a perfectly good rucksack that can put clothes in. Err, can put food stuff in.
Interviewer: But the plastic bags seem to pose a threat to animals, it sounds like?
Participant: Well, they generally do. They usually end up in rivers and trees and other places that are not supposed to be, it’s mostly because they’re not really biodegradable. Like, I remember growing up as a kid and my gran used to have a wee canvas bag, and then they all got phased out in the 80s.
Interviewer: Do you remember the first time that you saw plastic bags in shops?
Participant: Not really, because I think they’ve always been there.
Interviewer: Just something that’s always been in supermarkets?
Participant: Yes, as far as I can remember.
Interviewer: You mentioned trees, as well, seeing bags in trees?
Participant: Well people just throw them away and then it gets blown up into trees by wind.
Interviewer: Is that something that you see quite often?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is that along any particular areas that you see those?
Participant: Actually, we’re fairly close to supermarkets, along rivers, canals, in Edinburgh. Flying, going down streets in the centre of town. People just dump them.
Interviewer: Okay. So you said that you take your rucksack with you when you go shopping.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is that what you always use for shopping?
Participant: Very much.
Interviewer: On your bike as well?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Yes. How about the big shop where you have to pick up all the bulky goods?
Participant: That will be in a car.
Interviewer: What sort of bags do you use for that?
Participant: For the car? Usually it’s, like, a, mine and my partner’s backpack, but we have a couple of larger, long life bags that we use.
Interviewer: Oh right. Whereabouts did you get those from?
Participant: Various places. Can’t remember.
Interviewer: Are they kept in your car?
Participant: Generally, yes.
Interviewer: And the backpacks I guess you take with you all the time?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Yes. Are they the ones you take to work?
Participant: Actually yes.
Interviewer: So what is it about the rucksacks? Why do you use those for shopping?
Participant: More comfortable, spread the weight evenly across my back. It’s much more efficient on a bike than having carrier bags on your handlebars, getting caught up in your wheels.
Interviewer: Ah yes, so it helps the bike.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Is it something that’s become part of your routine now, to use rucksacks?
Participant: It’s, yes, and besides I’m usually always on my bike and usually always have a backpack, so it makes sense.
Interviewer: Do you ever use the single use plastic bags?
Participant: Sometimes. Like I said, they make good bin liners.
Interviewer: Is that what you use them for?
Participant: Generally, yes.
Interviewer: Will you buy a couple of bags and then take them home for use in that way?
Participant: Well, generally we’d stopped buying bags since they started charging 5p in Scotland, which is coming into effect in England really soon, I believe.
Interviewer: So it’s not something that you buy anymore?
Participant: Not really. We’ll go for bin liners when we run out of plastic bags.
Interviewer: How much are bin liners, can I ask?
Participant: I would imagine about £1 for 10 or something, which is kind of quite a lot. Or maybe £1 for 20. It might be less, I’ll have to have a look.
Interviewer: It’s not something that sticks out in your mind?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No. Okay. So do you think, you sound like you’re quite negative about the single use plastic bags generally though, because of the rubbish?
Participant: Well, it’s, because they’re single use plastic bags, people have, like, a mind-set that they can’t use them again, so they just chuck them out, and they basically just end up on the street or in a landfill, or in an incinerator or something. They’re plastic so if they end up in incinerators it’s pollutants. If they end up in a landfill, it doesn’t decompose forever, so again adding more pollutants. If it just ends up, like, flying around in the street, eventually it’ll get broken up in the sea into small tiny bits, which will get swallowed up by birds and fish, and then we’ve got to eat that. So yes, I’m pretty negative about most plastics, actually.
Interviewer: Do you think it would be a good thing if they removed plastic bags from stores?
Participant: I think it would, because it’s, I remember going over to Canada, and they have, they had paper bags there, which is, I think, sufficient, you know, and, sort of, biodegradable.
Interviewer: Do you think it would be better if we had paper bags over here?
Participant: I think it would be, but it’s, I know it’s less convenient and they tend to rip and stuff, especially if you’re clumsy, but if you’re, like, in a car, like, going from the supermarket to your car, all you need to do is carry the bags from your trolley into your car, and then from your car to your house. That’s perfectly fine, and for, I think, more people should have, like, either a canvass carrier bag for their shopping or a backpack, because that’s mostly what people, all people need, and it’s just because a shopping bag is, “Oh it’s more convenient.” People are lazy, they don’t do that kind of thing.
Interviewer: Do you think people can be persuaded, perhaps, to use these different types of bags, then? Like canvass ones and backpacks?
Participant: Eventually, when it becomes more the social norm to, you know, and because of the way culture seems to work, it’s like, the more people use other things like backpacks and canvass bags and things like that, the people who are using the disposable bags will get more and more, kind of, like, I don’t know. The act of using plastic bags will become frowned on, does that make sense?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you think that you feel like an outlier by using your backpack a lot?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you see other people using it as well?
Participant: Loads of people use backpacks, especially cyclists.
Interviewer: You see a lot of cyclists using the backpacks then?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: It sounds like you and your partner use backpacks all the time.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: How about your other friends and family?
Participant: I’m not entirely sure, I’ve never been shopping with them.
Interviewer: Fair enough. Okay, so if I can ask a couple of questions now about the plastic bag charge, which you just mentioned then.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So could you give me a description of what you view the plastic bag charge to be?
Participant: Well, when it first came out I called it a stealth tax, but I think it’s pretty good, because there are less people using, or choosing to use plastic bags. But a lot of people don’t mind the 5p extra charge. It’s supposed to be used for charity, but I’m pretty sure a bit of that’s getting syphoned off for profit.
Interviewer: So you called it a stealth tax to begin with?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Did you think it was, that sounds like quite a negative term?
Participant: Well, the prices for everything are going up, and it’s a time of, apparently, well, it’s actually a time of forced austerity, but from our lovely government here, but yes, I thought it was just, like, an unnecessary charge, but I think it’s going to be good if it does mean that people use less plastic bags.
Interviewer: Do you think it has had an impact?
Participant: There are less plastic bags flying around in the streets of Edinburgh.
Interviewer: Oh, you’ve noticed?
Participant: Yes, or less new ones.
Interviewer: So people seem to be taking less, or at least throwing away less plastic bags?
Participant: Yes, well people unnecessarily double bagged. So if they’re getting charged 5p per bag, they’ll no longer unnecessarily double bag.
Interviewer: Did you notice a big change when it first came in?
Participant: Not really. I think it’s changing more now as people use less. I mean, like, over a year you could spend the amount of money you save on not buying a bag on buying a nice big rucksack.
Interviewer: Do you think it takes time, then, for people to adapt to the change?
Participant: I think it will eventually, yes.
Interviewer: Could you say how long you think it might be?
Participant: I have no idea. It might be about ten years.
Interviewer: Oh yes.
Participant: People are a bit slow.
Interviewer: So in ten years’ time, if the charge stays then people become more environmental?
Participant: Especially if they up the charge from 5p to, say, 50p.
Interviewer: Would you be in favour of that?
Participant: Definitely. All plastic bags should be 50p, and call it an environmental clean-up tax.
Interviewer: Have you always used your backpack?
Participant: Pretty much.
Interviewer: I guess that’s because you’ve always been cycling, as well, for a long time, is it?
Participant: Yes. It’s also much easier. Like, I’d rather have a whole bunch of stuff on my back than have a horrible, nasty plastic bag cutting into my fingers.
Interviewer: Yes, so it’s a lot about comfort and ease?
Participant: Yes, it’s a lot about ease and comfort. I’m really lazy.
Interviewer: So did you find it surprising when they started the bag charge in Scotland?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: No? You felt like it was always going to happen?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So now it’s-,
Participant: You know, that or always should have happened.
Interviewer: Ah, right. Something that should have been done a long time ago?
Participant: For the reasons that they did it, then yes.
Interviewer: What do you think the main motives that they had were for introducing it?
Participant: To stop excess bags flying around the streets. I think it’s purely for environmental reasons, and to stop people using disposable bags the way they are.
Interviewer: How about, you mentioned as well the money going to charities, but you seem a bit sceptical about that.
Participant: I’m not entirely sure how transparent they are about it. It would be interesting to see actual figures coming from, where they money’s going.
Interviewer: Because right now, where do they say the money goes?
Participant: They say this 5p goes to charity, but it’s not specific. I would like to find, like, if there is a place they say where you should actually go to find out where the money’s going, and, like, actually have an actual breakdown of it, then that would be interesting, but since there’s not, there’s a lack of transparency, and we all know a lot of charities’ money gets syphoned off from other costs, so how much of this 5p is actually going to all the charities?
Interviewer: Yes, you need some better information about that then.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So if it was up to you, how would you allocate the money?
Participant: I probably wouldn’t give it to charity, I would give it to environmental clean-up groups who were actually going around, picking up all the litter and garbage out of, like, the trees and rivers and, or out of the countryside and stuff, you know. Those people need paid to do these kinds of things, otherwise they won’t do them.
Interviewer: In order to get that real, big impact, is that it?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: In order to get more impact?
Participant: In order to get more impact, yes.
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: Hence the larger charge I mentioned earlier.
Interviewer: Yes, the 50p one.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So you’re unsure where the money goes, but it feels like you are happy with the change with plastic bags that are in the local neighbourhood, at least.
Participant: Yes, I am.
Interviewer: Do you think other people would be as happy with the charge?
Participant: The 5p?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: It seems to be going well in Scotland. I think when it comes out on, what is it, the 10th of September or something like that, in England?
Interviewer: Sorry, the 5th.
Participant: Ah, yes, 5th of October, I think they’ll grumble a bit, and, but yes, I’m sure they’ll be, like, “Yes, whatever.”
Interviewer: It sounds like your views on the charge have changed quite a bit over time.
Participant: Well, it never really bothered me because I’ve always had my backpack.
Interviewer: Okay. But from calling it a stealth tax to thinking that it might be increased?
Participant: Yes, I suppose.
Interviewer: So do you think England’s going to benefit from their plastic bag charge?
Participant: Well there are more people in England, so there’s much more money going to charity. [Laughter].
Interviewer: But do you think that it’ll have the same impact? They’ll receive it the same way as Scotland has, and public support?
Participant: I don’t think they’ll bother that much. It’s only 5p per bag.
Interviewer: So in England, when they have the bag charge, there’s going to be some exemptions, so that some types of shops, like smaller shops, won’t have to charge the 5p.
Participant: Oh.
Interviewer: I think it’s less than 250 employees.
Participant: Oh right, so that doesn’t happen here in Scotland. That may be an exception in Scotland as well, I need to find that out, because if that’s the case then smaller shops are basically ripping us off for that extra bit of profit, you see what I mean? So even with the exemptions, I think that the smaller businesses will use that as an opportunity to make that extra 5p in direct profit.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s something that will happen now in England with the exemptions?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Are there any exemptions that you think should happen? Any particular shops or types of bags?
Participant: Well, I don’t think you should get charged for bags, for example, so when you go into a shoe shop, yes, and you need a bag to carry your new shoes, I think that should be exempt, or when you go for, like, a, let’s say you’re buying a whole bunch of clothes, you can hardly walk around the street with your new clothes without a bag. You know, like, clothing shops definitely should be exempt from the charge, but, like, mostly because they don’t use one use throwaway bags. They generally use large, good quality bags that you can definitely reuse a hundred billion times.
Interviewer: So because they’re sturdier they should be exempt because you can use them again?
Participant: No, it’s just because it’s actually necessary that they give you a bag for your large items. You know?
Interviewer: So you wouldn’t take your backpack when you go clothes shopping?
Participant: Well, I would, it’s just it depends what kind of clothes shopping I’m going for. So basically, if you think about, if you’re buying a ridiculously sized pair of [?? 27.21] boots that go up to your knees, and they’re quite chunky on the soles, which wouldn’t fit in your backpack, normally, yes, you’d definitely need a bag for them, especially for the size of the box that they’re in. Otherwise it’s difficult carrying boxes all around the high street looking for shops, looking at clothes and stuff.
Interviewer: And then to be charged for that bag.
Participant: And then to be charged for the bag, yes, every time, yes. I think they’re a bit cheeky.
Interviewer: How about if they introduced biodegradable bags?
Participant: If they introduced biodegradable bags, that would be great. Like the aforementioned paper bags, especially for groceries, that would be great.
Interviewer: Do you think they could be exempt?
Participant: I think they could be exempt, especially if they’re from recycled wood and paper.
Interviewer: Alright, lovely. So thinking about the plastic bag charge, how would you say it compares to other charges that change behaviour, like the congestion charge?
Participant: I’ve never had, witnessed a congestion charge, that’s a very London-centric thing, isn’t it? But I think there definitely needs to be a congestion charge in places like London. London’s ridiculously busy and there’s more than adequate modes of public transport, which, in that scenario, it’s like, they should have better parking facilities for out of town to get into town, to, and fair enough, as well as the congestion charge, and the congestion charge should be able to help pay for the parking areas and not be used as a stealth tax. But to change behaviour, to make the place a lot less smelly, I suppose, that’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Would you approve of a congestion charge in Edinburgh?
Participant: No, because it’s not got the traffic layout to completely adopt that. It’s, like, so yes, it’s not got the traffic layout to completely adopt that. Basically every road goes into the middle of Edinburgh before you can get out. There’s not very, well yes, you can get around but it’s not very easily around. Do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: So yes, it wouldn’t have the same availability as London.
Participant: Besides, Edinburgh’s tiny.
Interviewer: There’s also been some talk about additional charges on, say, extra plastic goods, like plastic bottles or individually wrapped vegetables and fruit.
Participant: Well if that’s the case then they’re basically, as a plastic charge, well if that’s the case then shop supermarkets should be held accountable for all the excess packaging that they are forcing on its customers, because that’s really what it is. It’s an excuse to bump up prices.
Interviewer: You don’t think there are environmental motives behind?
Participant: What, to charge more because the supermarket wrapped it in plastic?
Interviewer: I see your point. Okay, so we’re going to talk a little bit now about some environmental behaviours that you may or may not do around the house. These are things that were probably mentioned in the diary, as well. Do you save water at home?
Participant: I turn off taps when I’m brushing my teeth. By saving water, what do you mean?
Interviewer: Trying to reduce the amount of water that you use.
Participant: Yes. Generally.
Interviewer: So you turn off the tap. Is there anything else that you do?
Participant: Wash dishes as and when they need done. Well, when I’ve got lots of them. Have less baths.
Interviewer: Is this, not just the baths, but without getting too personal, but saving water, is that a regular sort of thing that you try to do?
Participant: Yes. We also have a dehumidifier and I use the water from the dehumidifier to water the plants.
Interviewer: Ah, cool. Is that something that you think about to reduce water, or is it something that you just do?
Participant: Well, it saves using tap water when I’ve taken water out of the air, which is probably actually better for the plants since it’s got less chemicals in it.
Interviewer: How about saving energy and electricity around the house?
Participant: Generally I sit with the lights off and play computer games. You’ve got to get that whole immersive thing. So I suppose, yes, in that respect I don’t have lights on unnecessarily when I don’t need them.
Interviewer: What sort of games console do you have?
Participant: PC.
Interviewer: Ah right, cool. So you turn off the lights when you’re playing games. Are there any other times that you save electricity or energy?
Participant: I don’t think there are ways I can save electricity the way I can, I don’t use unnecessarily lights, I turn off things by plugs, and stuff like that.
Interviewer: How about reusing things at home? Is that something that you do?
Participant: Reusing things? Such as? I reuse jars, glass jars. I keep my jams and stuff in them, and my spices.
Interviewer: Yes, it sounds like you’ve got a lot of spices there, as well.
Participant: I’ve got all the spices.
Interviewer: How about recycling and household waste?
Participant: Yes, we recycle. We’ve got little, big, like, boxes outside our flat which we separate our stuff in and then take it out to the bins in front.
Interviewer: Is that something that you regularly do?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: How hard or easy is that to do for you?
Participant: It’s dead easy. You know, it’s like, it’s because we keep the boxes outside our house, it doesn’t clutter up our house, so it’s totally fine.
Interviewer: What sort of things get recycled?
Participant: Packaging, mostly. Plastics, glass, cardboard, paper, pretty much everything that we can recycle gets recycled.
Interviewer: Okay, cool, and how often do you drive? Or do you have a car?
Participant: I don’t drive. My partner drives. So, no, I don’t drive at all.
Interviewer: Yes, and you cycle.
Participant: I cycle everywhere.
Interviewer: Is that to work as well, is it?
Participant: Yes. Either that or it’s public transport.
Interviewer: Ah, cool. How about eco-friendly cleaning products? Do you ever use those?
Participant: Well, no. There’s not really much point, because the cleaning ability of the cleaning product depends on the ionic content of said cleaning product, so if you’re going for, like, Ecover washing up liquid, which has a very low ionic content, versus Fairy, which has a very high ionic content, it’s the ionic balance of the water that stops the dirt going back onto your plates and stuff, so you actually end up using more Ecover which is much more expensive in the long run than say your Fairy, because you need a lot less Fairy, so I think it’s a false economy using more of a supposed environmentally friendly product.
Interviewer: How about, like, washing up powders for clothes washing? Would that be the same?
Participant: I think so.
Interviewer: Yes. How about organic food, as well? Do you buy that, quite often?
Participant: Sometimes, when it’s cheaper versus, I don’t see why it’s not cheaper than other foodstuffs, especially, since it has been proven that you get higher yield and taste better per hectare than current food. But current food is obviously heavily subsidised by the other markets that have a vested interest in forcing pesticides on us. So I do buy it when I can, but generally I’ll go for cheaper rather than that, because I’m not that rich.
Interviewer: You mentioned vested interests of pesticides.
Participant: Well, I know we’re nowhere near as bad as America and things like GMO cropping and Monsanto rich soils, which kills pretty much everything, but I do believe that there’s, the large agriculture and government policy also wants us to have all these chemical companies involved in our food.
Interviewer: Because, why would they have them interested?
Participant: Profit.
Interviewer: For companies like Monsanto?
Participant: Yes, Monsanto. Currently Monsanto, they own all the seed, you can’t use reclaimed seed, so you have to go back to Monsanto every year to get new seed, and for the seed you also need to buy their product, [?? 39.15], so that’s double profit for Monsanto, yes? And you have to do that all the time.
Interviewer: Are there any foods that you try to buy that would avoid Monsanto and companies like that?
Participant: I believe in the UK that we’re, kind of, like, we don’t really have to deal with Monsanto, it’s much more American. I think their products are pretty much banned here. But I’m not entirely sure what products do and do not have, or what suppliers do and do not have, so I’ll just go for whatever I can, I don’t know, basically.
Interviewer: How about environmental organisations? Do you support any charities or groups like that?
Participant: Greenpeace.
Interviewer: Do you pay, do you subscribe?
Participant: Yes, I pay a small thing every month.
Interviewer: Every month, is it?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What is it about Greenpeace that you support?
Participant: A lot of things. So, it’s like, they’ve got, mostly they’re environmental issues, and yes. There was a campaign that I really liked a couple of years ago. I can’t remember what it was, but that’s kind of why I joined them.
Interviewer: Which campaign was that? Do you remember?
Participant: Yes, I can’t remember. It was something to do with oil or something.
Interviewer: Cool. Okay, so when you were completing the diary, did you notice anything about your environmental behaviours, as you went through?
Participant: Not really. When I was completing the diary I was working in London and staying in a hotel, and basically eating in restaurants all the time, so I effectively had no waste because it was, well, deferred onto the places where I was eating. But…
Interviewer: Sorry.
Participant: No, it’s okay.
Interviewer: Yes, so it was a bit of an unusual time for you to complete the diary.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Lastly, can I ask, how would you define environmentally friendly behaviour?
Participant: [?? 42.05], recycling as much as possible, yes, pretty much recycling as much as possible and not being wasteful.
Interviewer: So making sure what you use is…
Participant: Is what you need.
Interviewer: Yes. Alright, lovely, thank you very much.
Participant: Unfortunately, commercialism goes completely against that. Sorry, consumerism. That’s it.
Interviewer: You think there’s a big gap between consumerism and environmentalism?
Participant: Well, consumerism is just to continually buy, buy, buy, buy. You don’t necessarily need it, but you want it because all these new things are amazing. So I do think consumerism goes against environmentalism. I think they’re polar opposites, in fact.
Interviewer: Do you think they could be combined? Say, to have sustainable consumerism?
Participant: No, because companies want to continually make a profit, so they have to release new, fantastic products, but I think it’s good that companies do release new, fantastic products. I don’t think they necessarily need to release them so quickly. I mean, a lot of the time we see half, unfinished products because they’ve not really finished them, if you know what I mean. They’re still buggy, and it’s up to the consumer to find the bugs which then leads to, “Oh, another new product.” So it’s almost as if they’re releasing products that are continually not complete.
Interviewer: In order to get more products out?
Participant: In order to get more products out.
Interviewer: So you’d be more in favour of slower cycles but more tested products?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Could I ask, so how would you, slightly moving on, how would you say how concerned you are about the environment?
Participant: I’m very concerned about the environment.
Interviewer: You’ve mentioned a few topics, but what would you say are your main concerns about the environment?
Participant: Mostly climate change.
Interviewer: Yes?
Participant: Mostly.
Interviewer: Do you see climate change as a threat?
Participant: Well, it is a threat. We’ve seen, like, small island communities completely washed away over the last 20 years or so, and we have been told that sea level versus England is rising. There are quite a lot of things. Also weather patterns have completely changed. We no longer get a proper winter, for example.
Interviewer: Is it, well, it’s not like what it used to be?
Participant: No. Not at all.
Interviewer: How so?
Participant: It’s warmer, we don’t get snow anymore, well, as much. It’s not that summers are a lot hotter, it’s just that we get less rain, or more rain, it’s become a bit less predictable.
Interviewer: So would you say it’s an important part of your identity to be environmentally concerned?
Participant: I wouldn’t say it’s an important part of my identity, it’s just that I choose to be more environmentally friendly and it’s not something I, like, rant and rave on about, but I do have, my friends tend to be quite environmentally friendly as well.
Interviewer: Is it often a point of discussion with your friends?
Participant: Not really. I’m sure there are times where I have talked about the environment, but it’s not often a topic.
Interviewer: Would you say, how concerned are you with the waste we produce?
Participant: As a whole, very concerned. We’re using far more resources than what the planet can sustain. You know, eventually we’re just going to turn into a big junk yard.
Interviewer: So you’ve got to use those in an efficient way?
Participant: Yes. We do. I don’t think that people do enough to recycle.
Interviewer: What more do you think people could do? Or do you think there’s areas they don’t do?
Participant: I think people can be more aware of the stuff, the things that can be recycled, and I think that there should be more outlets for stuff that can be recycled but currently isn’t.
Interviewer: Are there any particular items, you think?
Participant: You know, like, plastic wrapping, the recycling places just don’t take, because it’s just plastic wrapping. That can get recycled, as well as all the other plastics, just for example.
Interviewer: Yes, so if there was more institutional support for recycling?
Participant: I think it’s possibly because the vans that come and pick up the recycling, if they go into the vans, it just gets blown away. So maybe they should have more purpose built vans that can actually take flyaway plastic wrapping.
Interviewer: Yes. Oh, that’s great, thanks. So thinking about with the environmental problems and all the other problems in the world, such as social, health or economic problems, how high or how low would you rank environmental problems?
Participant: Environmental, health and what was the other one you said?
Interviewer: Economic.
Participant: Economic. I think they all, kind of, go hand in hand. You know, if you have good economic stability, you should be able to have good health economy and you should be able to have a good environmental policy, but if you strangle one of them, then you’re going to create an imbalance.
Interviewer: So they’re all interconnected?
Participant: Well, it tends to be, like, if you make people poor, they’re going to throw away more stuff, or not really, they’re not going to throw away more stuff, they’re just not going to be able to have, get new stuff, so when their stuff breaks they’re just going to chuck it out with, say, for example you make them so poor they can’t take their car to dump their TV into the recycle unit. They’re just going to dump it in the street, for example, so if you create that kind of imbalance where people can no longer have the ability to recycle, then yes.
Interviewer: So you can’t have one without the other?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: If you had to prioritise one particular one to tackle first, would there be one that you’d try to go for?
Participant: The economy, I suppose.
Interviewer: Why is that?
Participant: Well, the way things are just now, I mean, I completely disagree with this forced austerity agenda that completely does not work, which is only set out to hurt, first of all, the poor and the disabled, which is now starting to hurt the middle classes, and that’s not right, that the only people that this agenda is benefiting is the top 1-5%.
Interviewer: So if you were able to change that and start helping other people, as well, that would make a difference?
Participant: It would make a difference. People would be able to more afford the ability to buy said rucksack and use less plastic bags, because they’d have more money.
Interviewer: Then they can engage in more environmentally…
Participant: Then they can engage in more environmentally friendly practices, because then we’d have more money. Like, for example, being able to afford organic food is one of them.
Interviewer: So you mentioned, as well, with the recycling, that they could do a bit more to recycle different types of plastic. Do you think that there are other areas that the government or councils could do to help you be more sustainable?
Participant: Yes, they could introduce some kind of community [?? 53.29] culture. Like, planting more apple trees and cherry trees and maybe having community gardens, where communities can grow fresh foods for the community. Unfortunately that will harm profits for shops, but at least they’re getting much fresher, greener produce.
Interviewer: So they would be places that the community could come together and get some of the food from the trees?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: But you think there might be some shops that would be against that?
Participant: It would harm their profits directly.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you have sufficient skills, would you say, to help be sustainable yourself?
Participant: Not really. I have sufficient common sense to be as sustainable as I can be, but I don’t really have all the skills needed.
Interviewer: What sort of skills would you think would help you be more sustainable?
Participant: I don’t know. Just, like, being able to find out what I can use different things for in different ways. You know, it’s like, say for example you have an old computer. You want to be able to know if it’s, if it can be used for something else, or also if it’s energy efficient enough for say, doing something else, or if it really should get recycled.
Interviewer: Yes, to know what its potential is.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Would you say you’re happy with what you do for the environment at the moment?
Participant: I’m pretty happy with what I do for the environment at the moment, yes.
Interviewer: There are no particular areas you wish you could change?
Participant: Dependence on electricity.
Interviewer: Oh yes?
Participant: And fossil fuels.
Interviewer: Is that from the source, or personal?
Participant: From the source.
Interviewer: The National Grid?
Participant: There are much greener, more sustainable energy forms that we’re not tapping into, and government policy has just put a big stop on a lot of it, in favour of nuclear, which is very expensive, and not quite so sustainable.
Interviewer: What energy sources would you ask the government to look into more?
Participant: The ones that they stopped, like wind and water.
Interviewer: Do you see a lot of those projects, or have they stopped in Scotland?
Participant: Well, if you’ve read up anything about renewable energy, government has stopped grant funding for any new projects, as of, I think, the first quarter next year. So anything that has planning up until then is going through, but anything that has been asked for, planning from when they said no, to then, and beyond, is not getting funding. So there’s probably not going to be very many new wind farms coming up and about, even though it’s been a proven technology to work, especially within the UK since we’re nice and breezy.
Interviewer: Yes, so that would be an area you would be in favour of? More wind power?
Participant: Much more wind power. Much more renewable energy, actual renewable energy. It’s already proven to be highly efficient.
Interviewer: Alright, brilliant, thank you. There’s a couple of quick questions now. So how would you view your local neighbourhood?
Participant: My local neighbourhood? Difficult, because I live in a bit of a scheme in the centre of town, so my local neighbourhoods are full of, what, in what ways are you thinking?
Interviewer: What sort of problems do you see in your neighbourhood?
Participant: Okay. Social problems. There’s a lot of, there’s quite a lot of poor people there, despite being bang in the middle of the city. They have a whole bunch of problems, from drug addiction to a whole bunch of other things, so that could be better cared for, I suppose. There does tend to be quite a lot of litter, because I’m in the middle of the city. I don’t know. Yes, but generally it’s alright.
Interviewer: Yes, okay, but there’s some social problems and litter around, as well?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Are there any particular types of litter that you notice around the neighbourhood?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Any particular types of litter?
Participant: I don’t know, I’ve found a few hypodermic needles a few times.
Interviewer: Oh, nice.
Participant: Yes, I know. But it’s generally, like, bags and bits of paper and the odd mattress.
Interviewer: Okay, lovely.