Interviewer: So how did you find filling in the diary overall?
Participant: Yes, I enjoyed it.
Interviewer: Yes, and what did you find, like, easy and enjoyable and what other aspects were a little bit more difficult?
Participant: I found it enjoyable just kind of talking about where I’d been shopping, what I’d been buying. It made me think about my energy consumption and my recycling and, kind of, environmental issues. I didn’t really find any of it difficult, and it didn’t take long either, it was only 10 minutes so it was easy to, kind of, log on and do, so I don’t actually really have anything negative to say to be honest.
Interviewer: Did you find anything, you know, like a little bit difficult to write down or not?
Participant: No, everything was fine, if I’m honest.
Interviewer: Fantastic, yes. Did anything surprise you about the diary?
Participant: Just it kind of surprised me about me more than anything else, not about the diary. Just, like, what I buy and how much food I waste, and what I should be doing for the environment. So I learned more stuff about myself, actually, to be more mindful.
Interviewer: Okay, is there anything else that you, sort of, would like to say about the diary experience?
Participant: No, no. That’s fine.
Interviewer: Yes, so the next thing we could talk about is probably your food shopping trip.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Yes, if you could describe, you know, what is your typical food shopping trip like?
Participant: I would normally go in and try and plan what we’re having for the week. So I would always, kind of, get my fresh fruit and vegetables. I’d buy lots of stuff for that, and then I would buy, kind of, like, my daily products. Milk, cheese, yoghurts, stuff for lunches, sandwiches, kind of, like, bread and kind of cold meats, and then things for, like, dinner, like actually, kind of, butcher meat and stuff like that, and stuff that would go with it like rice or noodles and things. That’s probably what I would think of, and then the bad stuff like chocolate and crisps and all that kind of stuff, as well.
Interviewer: Do you take a list with you when you go shopping?
Participant: No, I normally, not normally. I would normally just, kind of, you know, try and remember things. I’m a bit of an impulse buyer, as well, so I would just kind of go with the flow.
Interviewer: So it’s not really in terms of planning meals or…
Participant: No, I mean, I do do that, depending on what I’m working for the week, so yes, I would kind of just plan them ahead. I make them often enough that I would know that I would need, so I don’t really need to take a list.
Interviewer: Do you tend to buy about the same things every week? Kind of the same things?
Participant: Yes, pretty much. I’m not the most adventurous cook, so yes, it’s just pretty much the same stuff every week. If I’m making something new that’s my recipe I would take the recipe with me, but that’s pretty much about it.
Interviewer: How many times a week or month do you do your main shopping trip?
Participant: A main shopping trip, probably, like, four times a month. I probably go to the shops, like, get bread and milk and stuff like that every, kind of, few days or whatever. [?? 3.32] yoghurts and stuff like that. I don’t really bulk buy with that, but the main shop I probably try and do, like, once a week.
Interviewer: Yes, and what kind of supermarkets or, you know, stores or whatever, outlets do you use to buy food?
Participant: There’s a big Sainsbury’s I’ll use, and there’s Asda as well, I would use Asda, or Tesco. Really, kind of, anything that I’m nearby I would just pop in. I’m not very loyal to a specific supermarket.
Interviewer: Yes, so for the main food shopping trip, where would you usually go?
Participant: Probably Sainsbury’s.
Interviewer: And for the top ups?
Participant: Probably the Tesco Local or an Asda if I’m up in the, kind of, shopping centre getting other bits and bobs I would pop into Asda, but probably Tesco.
Interviewer: Yes, and is there a reason why you chose Sainsbury’s, the big Sainsbury’s, for the main shop?
Participant: I just like that actual store, the kind of layout of the store. I like it. I like that you can get clothes and all that kind of stuff, as well. So it’s got a wee café you can go for a coffee, so I just tend to use that one.
Interviewer: Yes, and another thing I wanted to ask you, what is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: The kind of quality of the food. I like to buy decent meats, and I like fresh, I hate when you go to the shops and you buy strawberries and they’re, like, out of date within a day. So I like to get, like, nice fruit and veg and stuff, and I always find Sainsbury’s you get really good quality fruit and veg.
Interviewer: By quality, what sort of counts for your quality?
Participant: Just, like, the freshness of it, how long it lasts. That kind of, the taste of it. Like, how juicy the fruit is and stuff. All that kind of stuff is what’s really important to me.
Interviewer: What is less important to you when you choose your food?
Participant: Probably, like, I don’t really know. The packaging, I’m not really fussed about how much packaging it’s got. I always recycle it anyway. I’m not, like, I don’t specifically just go out and buy, like, brands all the time. I’m willing to, like, I try like its own brand, and I think, not all the time, but I think they’re normally quite good. So I don’t really know. There’s nothing I wouldn’t really not buy, I like to try things.
Interviewer: Yes. How do you usually travel to the store?
Participant: I normally travel by car to be honest, because I just think it’s easier for carrying all the shopping bags, and it’s just easier that way to do that for me, to be honest, that’s the way that I would normally travel.
Interviewer: How about for top ups?
Participant: Yes, probably just a car as well, unless I’m, like, out on my lunch at work, I would maybe nip into the shop then and just pick something up that way, and, like, walk to the shops, but normally if it’s on the way home from work I’ll just drive.
Interviewer: Do you usually go food shopping on your own or with someone?
Participant: Normally on my own. Taking someone with me, but they just tend to get in the way, don’t they, and you end up buying stuff you don’t really need, so if I go on my own, I know what I need and I don’t get distracted.
Interviewer: Regarding food waste at home, does it happen to you to need to, you know, put food in waste because it hasn’t been used?
Participant: Not normally. I mean, probably a while ago when you didn’t really recycle stuff, I’d probably bin a lot more than I do now, but now that I recycle a lot of my food…
Interviewer: You recycle, yes.
Participant: Yes, I’m definitely more conscious of how much I waste, so I try and cook what I need rather than overcooking, because I don’t have the biggest freezer to store things in, either. I try and, like, split my portions up before I even cook them, to save on the waste, so I do try and be careful of that.
Interviewer: Great. Okay, is there anything else that you would like to add to the shopping trip?
Participant: No. I quite like food shopping, actually.
Interviewer: Why do you like it?
Participant: I just, I like wandering about the shops, I like seeing what offers they have, I like buying new things and trying new things as well. I hate to have the same kind of palate all the time, I’m up for trying different things, so yes, I quite enjoy food shopping.
Interviewer: The next thing I wanted to ask you about is a little bit unusual. Could you tell me, maybe like five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear about supermarket plastic bags? What does it make you think about?
Participant: Probably necessary, not the best quality, not durable, or long lasting, not very exciting, either. That’s probably about it.
Interviewer: The first word you said, was it necessary or unnecessary?
Participant: Necessary.
Interviewer: Alright, and do you remember when you came across the plastic bags for the first time at all?
Participant: Probably maybe when I was, like, a teenager, maybe, and I would go shopping with my mum [?? 9.33] every week. Probably that’s, like, the first sort of time, or when I was at school, actually, we had to do, like, you know we used to pack the bags for, like, the school charity or something. That’s probably the, kind of, first sort of time that I really, kind of, noticed plastic bags out shopping.
Interviewer: Do you remember if the bags, you had to pay the bags already, or did you need to…
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: No, they were free at the moment? Yes. Do you have any, like, memories associated with that at all, apart from those that you mentioned?
Participant: For buying bags?
Interviewer: No, just having them for free in the supermarkets.
Participant: Oh no, just probably what I just said.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. What kind of bags do you normally bring to, sorry, what kind of bags do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: I normally just buy the 5p ones at the till. I tend to just go with those, unless I’m buying, like, wine or something, I would maybe buy, like, one of the wine bags that you can buy, or sometimes they’ve even got boxes you can put your wine in. I just tend to buy the 5p ones.
Interviewer: What is the reason for using those?
Participant: Just because I don’t really, you can buy bags for life, but I just tend to reuse those bags, like, in the house, the 5p ones for rubbish and stuff, so I end up throwing them out anyway, so I don’t really see the point of spending a lot of money on a durable bag when I’m just going to bin it, so I just tend to stick with the 5p ones.
Interviewer: How many of those do you take a week, would you say?
Participant: A week? Probably 15, maybe. Probably 15 a week, I would say. Right now I’ve probably got quite a lot in the house. I probably could take them with me to my food shopping, but I never actually [?? 11.47].
Interviewer: How many do you think you have of those in your house at the moment?
Participant: I’ve probably got about 10 upstairs, I think. Probably about 30 or something. 30 bags. That is a lot. Yes, I think 30.
Interviewer: About 30.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you use them only as bin liners, or are there any other uses you make of them?
Participant: I use them like [?? 12.18] for maybe wrapping your lunches in to take to work, I would use them, but yes, that’s probably about it. Mostly wee bin bags in the house, to be honest.
Interviewer: Do you use, when you said you use them as bin liners, do you also buy bin liners in shops or do you just use shopping bags?
Participant: I just use shopping bags.
Interviewer: What do you find good and not so good about these 5p carrier bags?
Participant: To be honest, they’re not the best quality. They tend to rip quite easily, because they’re not great value for money, but they’re not the best value for money, to be honest. [?? 13.15] are obviously much better quality, less [?? 13.19 break in recording]. So, I mean, [?? 13.23] a day shopping and by the time you get home they’re just all ripped and you need to bin them, so they’re not the best, to be honest.
Interviewer: Yes. Have you ever, I mean, what I wanted to ask is how is it using those 5p bags as compared to bringing your own bags? Have you ever considered bringing your own bags to shops, or not? Or is it, you know, whatever you would like to say around this? Hello? Hello?
Participant: Sorry, I have brought the bags for life a few times shopping, but I always seem to forget my bags and I end up going to the shops and not having them with me. So when I remember to bring them, I do bring them, unless I need, like, the bags around the house anyway, I would just buy them, but I just try and bring them when I can.
Interviewer: Yes. Have you ever tried to bring, sort of, your own bags to the shops? Or buy some kind of durable things, or is it just not something that interests you for some reason?
Participant: I do find that I just keep forgetting, and just end up buying them there. I do try and buy bags for life for, like, heavier items and then I wouldn’t use them as bins around the house, I would try and, like, take that back out into my car.
Interviewer: Yes, so the bin use is the main, sort of, reason?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you also find it more practical to use single use bags or not?
Participant: Yes, I just [?? 15.16] bin liners for around the house, so yes, I just, probably more practical for me.
Interviewer: But in terms of carrying your shopping, how practical are they?
Participant: Yes, they’re okay as long as you don’t overload them they’re fine. The wee tiny bags aren’t [?? 15.34] so you know, if you’re getting anything heavier, you either have to [?? 15.38] or double bag them, or just spend the extra money and get the bags for life, you know, for milk and juice and cans of juice and stuff, I would buy bags for life and put them in that.
Interviewer: Okay, so you would take a few bags for life for heavier things.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: How many bags for life would you take in that case?
Participant: Probably just two. I would put a couple of pints of milk in them and some juice and stuff, so probably just two. Two or three, maybe.
Interviewer: Would that happen every week?
Participant: Probably not every week. Once I’ve used the bags for life, I try and take them back out to the car so I can reuse them for heavier stuff, so as long as I remember to do that, I’ll just use the bags for life for heavier items.
Interviewer: Where do you normally store those bags for life?
Participant: In the kitchen cupboard, I just put them all in there.
Interviewer: Do you reuse them for anything else other than sometimes bringing them to the shop?
Participant: If I don’t use them for food shopping, if I’m going, like, shopping in Glasgow or whatever, for clothes or shoes or whatever, I’ll sometimes take bags for life for then, and just put the stuff in that, but mostly food shopping.
Interviewer: Great, yes. I’m sorry but sometimes the line kind of cuts a little bit, so there are words that are not very, very clear. We’ll try a little bit, and if not shall I try and call your mobile? Would there be better reception, do you think?
Participant: I’m on mobile just now.
Interviewer: Oh, you are on mobile just now?
Participant: Yes. I’ll try, I’ll go and sit next to the window and see if that’s any better.
Interviewer: Yes, that would be nice, yes.
Participant: Is that any better?
Interviewer: Let’s try.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Yes, let’s try. If not then I will try and give you a ring to the landline again. We’ll see how it goes. In your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Yes, very important. They should be available so, yes, you can carry your shopping.
Interviewer: What would happen if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores? How would you find it?
Participant: Probably difficult. You would have to, just, put the shopping in the boot, not in a bag. It would be awkward to carry, and kind of unpack, or you would have to take boxes with you to put it all in, so it would be a big negative.
Interviewer: How about own bags? Something like, you know, whatever they could be, rucksacks or, you know, like the very, very large bags for life that can pack plenty, like 10 kilos easily in them.
Participant: Yes, I mean, they are a good idea and as long as you had something that you could just fill it with all your stuff then take it from your car into your house, that would be a good idea, as well.
Interviewer: Do you know what is the plastic bag charge?
Participant: [?? 19.01 break in recording] Scotland, so it’s you pay for your single use bags, and it’s 10p for bags for life, or more expensive depending on the quality of them.
Interviewer: In what context have you heard about the bags for life for the first time? Sorry, not bags for life, the 5p plastic bag charge.
Participant: It was last year, and they kind of advertised everywhere to say they were going to charge for bags. So it was food shopping and out shopping for clothes, just shopping in general, actually. They introduced it last October, I think it was. So I think actually, I don’t mind it at all.
Interviewer: You don’t mind it?
Participant: No, definitively.
Interviewer: So for you what is good about it and what is not as good, probably?
Participant: It wasn’t good at the start, having to pay for bags. I thought it was a bit cheeky when you were spending money in the shops to pay for your bag, but then I realised that the money was going towards environmental causes in Scotland, and to help with recycling and stuff, and it’s actually [?? 20.16] because it makes you think about how many bags you use, so it’s actually a real positive having to pay for your bags now. I don’t buy nearly as many bags. Like, I used to take loads of free bags and double bag things and you were just really wasteful, and now because you pay for them, you don’t see any plastic bags all around the streets, people were just dumping them, and people are more mindful about how many bags they’re using, and people reuse bags, and it’s actually a really good thing that they’ve brought in.
Interviewer: Yes, and would you say that your bag use has reduced since the charge was introduced?
Participant: Yes, definitely. Definitely.
Interviewer: How many do you think you were taking at the time? You know, over a year ago?
Participant: Oh God, loads. Just stupid amounts. I would double bag milk, I would double bag juice, so I’ve probably halved my bag consumption than what I was taking last year.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of this plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s to make you think about how many bags you use. To encourage recycling, to encourage you to reuse bags and to make you think about, you know, what you’re doing when you’re going shopping and what you need. So I think those are the main reasons.
Interviewer: Did the plastic bag charge change your shopping behaviour at all when it was introduced?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How quickly did you, sort of, adapt to the fact that the charge came into effect?
Participant: Probably a couple of weeks. Just to get used to it.
Interviewer: A couple of weeks?
Participant: Yes. You were given so much notice that you were prepared before it even started, so [?? 22.13].
Interviewer: Do you think that with the introduction of the plastic bag charge, you became a more environmentally friendly person or not?
Participant: I would say so, yes. I mean, the plastic bags that I would just put them in the bin before, now I recycle them, and now I think about how many bags I’m buying, I reuse bags rather than just throwing them in the bin. So yes, definitely, I’m definitely more mindful.
Interviewer: Why did you just chuck them away before the charge?
Participant: I didn’t even think about recycling, really, up until a year ago, when I really, kind of, got into it. So now it just makes you think, if you’re having to spend 5p on all these bags, how many do you need? Can you recycle them? All that kind of stuff. So reusing them and kind of cutting down the waste for the environment is always a good thing.
Interviewer: Yes, and what do you think about how this plastic bag charge policy is being applied in Scotland?
Participant: Do you mean, like, what they do with the money?
Interviewer: In terms of how well it is applied or delivered in Scotland, the charge.
Participant: Yes, no, it’s fine, there are notices everywhere to say how much the bags cost and yes, you don’t hear any single person complain about it, to be honest.
Interviewer: In terms of how the sellers, the cashiers apply it, was there anything that you noticed about it?
Participant: Yes, they always say, “Have you got your own bags with you today?” and, “Do you need bags? How many bags do you need?” They put them out for us and you can always add later, so they’re always encouraging you just to watch how many bags you’re getting, so yes, everyone is on board.
Interviewer: Do you find any differences in terms of how the bags are proposed in the different shops where you buy things?
Participant: You’ve got your, kind of, 5p bags and your 10p bags, and then you’ve got your bigger bags, and they’re all kind of laid out with the prices next to them and stuff, so, and then there are boxes that they give you for free, for your wine, and so yes, it’s all clear, it’s all easy to understand, so it’s not a difficult process.
Interviewer: Oh yes.
Participant: It’s now become part of your shopping experience, so loads of folk take bags, loads of folk buy bags, so yes, it’s easy to do and things like that.
Interviewer: Yes, of course, and do you find that different shops, kind of, you know, because in some shops, I know it’s from my own experience, so I can give you an example, that sometimes I go to one shop and I realise that nobody is proposing me directly a bag, and I go to another one and the situation can change, and then, you know, someone starts to put things in the bag even before I ask about anything, or even if, I don’t take bags personally, but, you know, some people do, but I know that in some supermarkets the approach will be different, so have you seen any differences in approaches?
Participant: Yes, I mean, I know that in places like Lidl and stuff, all the bags are, like, under the conveyor belt, so you kind of help yourself and put them on, what you need, and then there’s, in Asda, as well, they’re all kind of there, you help yourself, other shops the staff actually ask you how many you need, and they give you them. So yes, different shops definitely do it differently. Sometimes I’ve had to ask for bags, because they haven’t offered me any, but I think maybe from their point of view, they think a lot of folk bring their own now, so they don’t really offer them out as much as they have to, so yes, different shops are definitely different.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you think that bringing your own bag is sufficiently encouraged in the country?
Participant: Yes, I think so. Most folk I know carry bags with them when they go food shopping, and they carry bags when they go out, like, clothes shopping or to, kind of, malls and stuff like that. I see a lot of folk that have probably got those big, massive bags that you were talking about in their trolleys, and they just literally put all their stuff in it, as they’re going round. So yes, I mean, I would definitely say everyone’s aware of what’s going on, and people are really trying to do their bit.
Interviewer: Has this always been like this, or not?
Participant: No, definitely not. Definitely big changes since the charges came in. I would say that it’s made a lot of folks think about what they need and what they don’t need.
Interviewer: Another thing I wanted to ask you about, the same charge is going to be introduced in England just in a couple of weeks’ time. Have you heard about it?
Participant: Yes, I have. Yes.
Interviewer: You have? Yes. Where from?
Participant: Just from my English friends, when they come up, they say that they don’t have to pay for their bags yet, but I knew it was going to be some point this year, but I didn’t know when it was.
Interviewer: I see, yes. So you know what will happen in England is that this plastic bag charge is not going to be applied everywhere in all kinds of shops.
Participant: Oh right.
Interviewer: And also not to all kinds of bags.
Participant: Oh right, okay.
Interviewer: Yes, so there will be exemptions from the charge, and I wanted to ask you your opinion about these exemptions.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: The first one is medium to small retailers and corner shops. What do you think about those?
Participant: Well, a lot of small businesses down here, I don’t know how small, but they don’t have to charge for bags.
Interviewer: In Scotland?
Participant: Yes, in Scotland.
Interviewer: Right.
Participant: Really small ones. I think they will eventually, but I don’t think they have to just now. Anything, I think pretty much any kind of newsagent and above, maybe bigger, maybe not a newsagent, maybe like a Tesco Local kind of size, Co-Op size, they all charge, that size up, and it’s every store, not just food, everywhere, that’ll charge for a bag. Even, like, say if you go to the drive through at McDonald’s you get charged for your bags, your paper bag.
Interviewer: Exactly, so what do you think? Also, yes, the hot food takeaways will be, hot food outlets will also charge people for bags, for drinks and hot food.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: So what do you think about those? So the corner shops, smaller shops and…
Participant: I get why, I get that, because they’ve got a business to run, haven’t they, and they’ve probably got enough overheads and they don’t want to really put people off going in and buying…
Interviewer: Do you think that McDonald’s has a lot of overheads?
Participant: No, probably not. To be honest, I think it’s a cheek that if you’re going to the drive through you have to pay for the bag, because how else are you going to get your food out? So I think that’s a bit much, and it’s a paper bag as well, so it’s not a plastic bag. You know, it’s biodegradable and stuff like that, so to be honest I think it’s a bit of a cheek up here that they charge for that. They charge for any bag up here, so again, it can be a bit annoying. You don’t mind paying for plastic, but when it’s a paper bag or brown bag, I don’t see why you should have to pay, but it’s just the rules up here.
Interviewer: How about clothing shops? Clothing and shoes?
Participant: That annoys me. To be honest it annoys me, but we need, if you’re buying, like, a couple of pairs of shoes and they give you the huge, big bags, the really nice bags, they’re only 5p, which isn’t as bad, because it’s only 5p and you get this massive bag, but you just think, you’re buying clothes and shoes and how else are you meant to get those items home when you’re waking about the shops? So that annoys me a little bit. But then I think if it’s for the environment, then fine, but I don’t agree with it as much as I do, like, food shopping-wise.
Interviewer: Yes, so do you think the charge should apply to those types of shops that we’ve just discussed?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Yes, okay, and now also I wanted to ask you about another comparison. It’s, you know, comparing two other types of charges. For example, higher fuel duties, which basically means higher prices of petrol. How do you think the plastic bag charge compares to higher…
Participant: I’d rather pay more for plastic bags than fuel. I’m sick of paying for fuel, honestly. I just think fuel is too expensive, and I think we need to give people that use a car a break from the fuel tax, to be honest.
Interviewer: So would you agree with higher prices for the fuel?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: For the environmental purposes?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How about a different type of charge which actually don’t really exist in the country, but it does exist in, you know, it exists in Germany and Austria. It’s a little deposit that people pay on plastic bottles and some packaging, and when they return these plastic bottles empty and, you know, the packaging, they get the deposit back.
Participant: Oh right, okay.
Interviewer: What do you think about that?
Participant: I think, I mean, up here they do, well they’re just actually going to stop it, but Irn-Bru do, like, you get 20p for every time you take a glass bottle back, but they’ve actually stopped, they’re stopping it now because no one’s returning the glass bottles, because everyone just recycles them. So I think it’s a good idea, it’ll encourage people to take things back, but I think people just recycle anyway. I don’t know if they would want to get their, well, they probably would want to get their money back, actually, so it’s probably a good idea.
Interviewer: Yes, okay. What do you think will happen in Scotland in 10 years’ time, or in the UK, even, you know, kind of plastic bag charges are introduced, and then, what do you think is going to be 10 years’ impact of this charge?
Participant: Oh, I would say we’ll still be getting charged for it. That’s something I think we’ll always have to do. It wouldn’t surprise me if it was higher charges, to be honest, as well, so that charge will never go away now.
Interviewer: Yes, and what do you think will be the result of the charge? You know, what kind of changes will it produce?
Participant: I’m hoping that people will be more mindful in recycling, maybe people won’t take as many plastic bags. It might even go down the route that there will just be these big, massive bags like you were saying, or people taking cardboard boxes or actually just using brown bags to carry their shopping out instead, so I think it’ll have a lot of positive changes.
Interviewer: Yes, okay, great. Yes, so moving on slightly to a different topic, so we’ll talk now a little bit more about those behaviours, you know, that are sort of performed within the household, within home. We’ve touched upon some of them in the diary. So I just wanted to ask you, do you tend to save water and energy at home at all?
Participant: Yes, I try and save as much water and energy as I can. I don’t keep the shower on for any longer than I have to, and I try and turn the tap off when I’m cleaning my teeth, and don’t have any of the plugs on, I turn them all off when I’m not in the house and not using them, and don’t really use the heating unless I really, really need to.
Interviewer: Are you on a water meter at all?
Participant: Am I on what sorry?
Interviewer: Are you on a water meter at all?
Participant: No. No. We don’t get charged for water up here, no.
Interviewer: Oh yes, of course. Yes, I used to live in Scotland. Free water, beautiful days.
Participant: Yes, you don’t pay water. I know, yes, you don’t pay water up here, no.
Interviewer: Yes, right. So, okay. Would you say that saving energy, well, let’s speak about energy in particular. Would you say that saving energy is a habit for you?
Participant: Yes, it probably is just second nature now. I really try and, for the environment but also for my electricity bills, really try and watch what I’m using, where I’m using it. Don’t boil the kettle, like, with it full unless I need it and stuff like that, so yes, I would definitely say it’s second nature now.
Interviewer: Do you have think about this at all, to plan it?
Participant: What, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you need to plan any of those things, or to think about them?
Participant: No, it’s just habit. I just do it. I don’t have to think about it at all.
Interviewer: Yes, and why would you say you do it?
Participant: I just don’t want to feel guilty. I’d feel guilty about not doing my bit. So I like to try and help out in whatever way I can, and if that’s just recycling and turning things off, and because I use my car a lot of the time for work and personal stuff rather than using public transport, I do try and do my bit in other ways.
Interviewer: Sorry, the question has just escaped me. It will probably come, it’s okay. What do you do with the household waste?
Participant: Household waste I just put in the main bin outside, and that just gets collected. Every two weeks that gets collected.
Interviewer: Do you have any recycling facilities locally? Or not?
Participant: Yes, there is. Down at the local market, you can take things down to recycle, or we’ve all got bin and boxes to put all our recycling in. So the council make it really, really easy for you to recycle, so you’ve not really got an excuse not to, to be honest.
Interviewer: But it’s not something that you do personally?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: It’s not something that you do personally?
Participant: No, I recycle quite a lot.
Interviewer: Oh, okay, yes, and could you then speak a little bit about this?
Participant: Yes, I recycle my food waste [?? 36.37].
Interviewer: Oh yes, yes, you mentioned that, yes.
Participant: All our plastics, I recycle cans, tins, all that sort of stuff. I recycle, I don’t really read newspapers to be honest, but whenever I get cardboard or magazines, I recycle them. I’ve got a gardener, so I don’t do the garden, but he does the garden and there’s a bin for that which he uses, so yes, I recycle pretty much everything I can. Every week, pretty much. Every week or every two weeks, so the council make it really easy for you to recycle.
Interviewer: So it’s all on your doorstep, those bins?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Yes, and I did remember actually the question that I had just before. For the energy, what are the reasons why you tend to save energy?
Participant: Just, again, to try and reduce my bills, if I’m honest, as well. Also, just, I like to make sure that I’m doing my bit for the environment. I don’t really see the point in having the heating on when I’m not in the house and things like that, so I definitely just try and cut things down when I’m not using them, and I’m mindful of that.
Interviewer: About the driving, so you said that you have to drive, yes, to work and things like that.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Probably every day, if I’m honest, I’ll drive, yes.
Interviewer: Do you try to save car trips at all?
Participant: No, if I don’t need to go out, I won’t. I try and, if I know that I’m going to the shops and work, I’ll try and do it all, like, at one time, try and kind of work it in that way, but I tend to drive most days. I work most days, so I do use the car a lot, I do rely on the car.
Interviewer: Do you walk or cycle for short journeys?
Participant: Do I what, sorry?
Interviewer: Do you walk or cycle for short journeys?
Participant: Yes, I mean, I try and walk, like, for exercise. Like, if I’m going for coffee or stuff like that, there’s like a wee, kind of, café place, like, I tend to walk for that, but that’s more for leisure. If I’m going food shopping or other things like that, I would take the car, unless it’s into Glasgow and I’m maybe having, like, a drink for lunch, I would maybe get the train into Glasgow, so I would do that.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to buy eco-friendly or organic or sustainable products, or Fairtrade, something like that?
Participant: Yes, I do buy a lot of, kind of, organic food. I don’t really buy eco-friendly products, if I’m honest, but I do buy a lot of organic vegetables, meats and things like that. I think they taste a lot better, so I do that, and there are quite a lot of markets and stuff like that around about me, that they have once every couple of weeks, so I’ll maybe go there and get, like, fresh vegetables and stuff, just to help the farmers and things like that. So yes, I try and do that as much as I can.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. Does it happen to you to support environmental organisations and environmental issues at all? Either through donations or through petitions?
Participant: No. I mean, to be honest I don’t really do that. That’s something I should probably do more often, but no, I don’t really do that as yet.
Interviewer: Yes, that’s fine. Yes, no problem. What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you at all?
Participant: It just means looking after the environment for ourselves and for future generations, being mindful and being respectful of the environment, and trying to do your bit to, kind of, protect it.
Interviewer: What do you think are the most environmentally friendly behaviours?
Participant: Recycling, I would definitely say is up there. Watching how much, kind of, electricity and gas you’re using is up there as well. Trying to use the car less, and use public transport and walking and cycling, I think you should be doing that, and maybe using different, kind of, alternative methods of electricity, like, the wind turbines and solar panel, trying to do your bit for all that, as well.
Interviewer: Sure. Yes, okay. How concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m probably fairly concerned. I feel guilty if I don’t recycle. I feel guilty if I leave things on. I know that I should try and turn them off and do a bit more. I think there’s more I can do, like cutting out car use, so there are definitely improvements I should be making to help the environment.
Interviewer: Would you say that the environment is an important part of your identity, of yourself, or not really?
Participant: Yes, I mean I would say it is fairly, kind of, part of me. I tend to take a lot of pride in the amount of recycling I do and things like that, so I would say it is definitely an important part of my life, and not just for me, but for future generations, I want to be able to do my bit to help keep the planet going.
Interviewer: Yes, sure. Okay. The next thing here I wanted to ask you is connected, we’re already getting now to the end of the questions, so we’re nearly there.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Compared to other issues in modern society, how important would you say the environment is to you? Compared to things like social, economic or health concerns?
Participant: Yes, I would say it is, it’s really important. It’s one of those ones that you might not see changes yourself, but I think it will be changes, like, for future generations, and you want to be able to make sure that you’re keeping the planet alive, and things like that. So I would say it’s fairly, you know, up there for me, along with things like the refugees from Syria and stuff like that. I would say that’s really important just now, and healthcare, I think healthcare’s really important. So I would definitely say it’s an important issue, and I think it’s something we should all really take note of and do our bit for.
Interviewer: Yes, of course. Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues, or not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you… yes, please?
Participant: No, I was just going to say, I think I should really watch the news more, read up more, find out ways that I can help do more. I mean, I don’t really know any organisations or charities, to be honest, all the charities I really know are, like, cancer charities, animal charities, kids’ charities, I give to all them, to, like, the boxes and things like that. I don’t give to any environmental charities, so I think I really need to research them more and become more aware of what’s going on in the world, and really pay attention and help that way.
Interviewer: What kind of areas in your life would you be, you know, willing to change, or to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: Use the car less, stop being so lazy, use the car less. I would probably say donate money or sign petitions, that kind of thing, I would be willing to do and it’s something I should be doing.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Do you feel like you have enough skills to do things for the environment, or not?
Participant: Not just now, no. I feel like once I’ve read up on it more and I know what I’m doing and where I should be going with it, that will be better. This, the blog that we were doing, all the questions about economical products and stuff like that, I was like, “What is that?” I’d never even looked at that, so yes, that’s something I really need to be doing, as well, find out what’s going on, look at products with less packaging, sorry, do that more. I can be guilty of putting things off, and I don’t need to. So those are things I really could be improving on myself, and becoming more knowledgeable of.
Interviewer: Sure. How about your feelings regarding the support that, you know, the government, environmental organisations or private companies provide to people to be more environmentally friendly? Do you think there is enough support from [?? 44.31]?
Participant: Yes, I mean, I think they are doing the best they can. I think they’re bringing these bag charges in, they’re doing that, they’re doing a lot trying to get wind farms up, they’re trying to get the better, sort of, energy, getting the different cars in, as well, that don’t use, you know, fuel and are powered differently. I think it’s a massive learning curve for everyone. I know that in, like, I don’t know if it’s Germany or not, but I know that in certain places, recycling is, like, a legal requirement, and you have to recycle, and I think that’s a good thing, because I go to America quite a lot, and I don’t think they even know what recycling is. So I think Britain is definitely taking bigger steps, positive steps. I think it will take time to try and help everyone to do it, but I think people are really getting in the swing of it, and they really know that it’s important, and I would say that over the last few years it’s made leaps and bounds, so I do think the government’s doing everything they can to try and encourage people to do their bit. I suppose they can’t make a million changes in the one year, they have to just do it steady so that everyone can get on board.
Interviewer: Is there anything that can be done better on their side? Is there anything you can think of?
Participant: No, not right now. I know that taxing of the cars, and fuel and stuff, that’s probably a good thing. I think they’re doing everything they can at the moment.
Interviewer: Sure, yes. Okay. Are you currently happy with what you are doing for the environment?
Participant: I can do more.
Interviewer: You can do more?
Participant: Yes, I definitely could do more.
Interviewer: Yes, we discussed already a couple of things that you mentioned about the changes. Yes. Okay. I wanted to ask you as a last question something about your neighbourhood. What are the things that you like in your neighbourhood, particularly, and what are the things that you would say are problematic?
Participant: I like the area, I like the schools, I like the neighbours. I like the, kind of, cleanliness now, there’s hardly any litter, because they’ve put more bins and stuff up. Stuff I don’t particularly like is antisocial behaviour, which isn’t a huge problem, but if you’re, like, waking to the shops at the weekend, you do get the young kids asking you for alcohol and cigarettes and stuff like that. That can be a bit annoying, and just, like, hanging about the streets. They don’t do it as much, but sometimes they hang about the streets and they drink, because they’re probably the ones that will leave litter, you can see a few glass bottles and stuff then. That’s probably the only thing. I’ve got good neighbours and stuff, so to be honest, I’ve probably got good bus and train links, as well, that I could actually use more. So all in all it’s actually a pretty good place to live.
Interviewer: Regarding, like, problems in your neighbourhood, what would you say is not, you know, as good?
Participant: Not good would just probably be, like, the antisocial behaviour aspect of it, like at the parks and stuff, like at the weekend with the kids, but what are they meant to do at the weekend? There’s hardly anything for them to do, so it’s one of those ones, you can’t be too hard on them. We don’t really have a lot of crime. I mean you get the odd house break ins and stuff like that, but you don’t really get graffiti, so all in all there aren’t really a lot of bad things about the neighbourhood. I think I stay in a pretty nice area, to be honest.
Interviewer: Yes. Are there any litter related issues?
Participant: Not anymore, no. There used to be, I would say, like up until last year. You would see, like, plastic bags strewn about the place, but now I think with the charges being brought in, people are not wanting to waste their 5p bags, so yes, I mean, litter, I don’t know if they got more wardens, but the litter’s getting picked up. So no, I wouldn’t say that’s an issue anymore.
Interviewer: Great. Okay, thank you very much.
Participant: No problem.
Interviewer: Is there anything else you would like to add before we finish?
Participant: No, that’s about it, yes.
Interviewer: Fantastic. Thank you very much. I just had a couple of questions…