Interviewer: So do you have any questions before we start?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, excellent, okay, so can you tell us how you found filling in the diary experience?
Participant: Yeah, it was okay.
Interviewer: Yeah?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Did you find anything difficult or was anything hard?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: No, and did you find anything surprising when you were filling in the diary?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: No, was there anything that you found that was easier for you to complete when you were writing in the diary?
Participant: No, just a normal diary I think.
Interviewer: Was it completed most days?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: Every day, oh brilliant, well thank you, what time did you complete them?
Participant: It used to be quite late because I work a wee bit late and I’ve got a wee girl so it used to be a bit, just when I, before I used to go to bed, so about, whenever I got time basically.
Interviewer: Ah, right, yeah, that makes sense, that makes sense. Okay, lovely, well I’m glad that everything worked smoothly with the diary, so can I ask now about some shopping routines, could you describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: I normally don’t do big shops because I’ve got a wee girl, so I do like small frequent ones, the reason being that as well I eat a lot of fruit and veg and I like to buy my fruit and veg daily and I like to do small frequent shops rather than a big shop.
Interviewer: Oh right, and whereabouts do you normally go?
Participant: I only shop in Tescos.
Interviewer: Is that a local one nearby?
Participant: Yeah, it’s a wee small Express, it’s expensive but it’s just so quicker than going to the big one.
Interviewer: So it’s a bit more expensive but it’s easier to get to?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How do you normally get there can I ask?
Participant: Drive or walk.
Interviewer: You drive or you walk?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: How long is it to drive?
Participant: Less than 2 minutes.
Interviewer: And how long to walk?
Participant: About 5 minutes, it’s because I’ve got a wee 9 month old baby, and sometimes you can’t walk with all the shopping and load the car on and put it on and it’s better just taking her in the car seat and then doing the shopping and then back in the car.
Interviewer: Just sometimes it’s easier to walk?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you normally take a shopping list with you when you go shopping?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It’s just what you need in the house?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: And you said it was mostly fruit and veg that you normally buy is it?
Participant: I do all sorts, it just depends, but mostly my fruit and veg, daily it’s fruit and veg.
Interviewer: Is there any sort of things that you look out for when you’re shopping, any particular products or offers?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: You always know what you’re going to buy, that sort of thing?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t buy cheap stuff like I don’t buy Smart Value stuff because I don’t like the taste of that.
Interviewer: You don’t buy the cheap stuff, sorry, I didn’t catch that bit?
Participant: I don’t buy cheap or Smart Value stiff because it’s, I don’t like the taste of it.
Interviewer: Do you go for the high end stuff as well?
Participant: It depends, yeah, mostly.
Interviewer: Mostly?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you, sorry, do you normally go by yourself is it or do you take your, someone else?
Participant: My 9 month old baby goes with me, that’s why it gets it harder.
Interviewer: I’m sorry, I didn’t quite catch that?
Participant: The 9 month old baby goes with me, that’s why it’s a wee bit harder to shop for a big shop.
Interviewer: Oh right, I see, and how much would you say of your food that goes to waste, or do you end up using it all?
Participant: I do, I buy things [?? 05:25]
Interviewer: I’m sorry, the line’s a little bad down here, can you say that again?
Participant: I do, sometimes I buy food for the sake of it, but I would say, say I waste it, I waste a lot of stuff, yeah.
Interviewer: You do waste it?
Participant: Yeah, it does go to waste sometimes.
Interviewer: Yeah, is there any particular types of food that go to waste?
Participant: No, just whatever I cook, sometimes it goes to waste, I mean if my husband’s not ate it and I’ve not ate it.
Interviewer: Is there any other shops that you go to or is it just the Tesco?
Participant: Tescos or sometimes Morrisons for a change.
Interviewer: Just if you fancy something different?
Participant: Yeah, the other shops I like are Home Bargains and B&M but I don’t buy food out of them because they don’t taste the same.
Interviewer: So the taste is important?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, lovely stuff, so can I ask now about, talking about plastic bags and bag use, so can I ask for the first 5 words or expressions that come to mind when you hear “plastic bag”?
Participant: I don’t pay, in Scotland we pay for bags so I refuse to pay for bags, I don’t see because why we need to pay for bags, if you’re spending £30, £40, why do you need to pay for a bag? It has to be, so I don’t pay for bags so I don’t buy bags.
Interviewer: So you think it’s unfair to get people to pay for them when you’re spending a lot of money in the shop?
Participant: I just don’t see how, I understand for clothing and stuff but for food, I don’t see the concept why you need to pay for a bag, so I don’t pay for bags. I pay for a bag for clothing but I wouldn’t pay for a bag for food.
Interviewer: What is it about food that makes you not want to pay for bags?
Participant: Because I use them to carry all these tins, they’re heavy, and you’re spending like, okay, it would be a certain amount on food, say if you’re spending £5 then it’s okay, you pay for a bag, but if you’re spending £15 or £20 then you should get it free.
Interviewer: How do you feel about the single use plastic bags, are you a fan of them or do you not like using them?
Participant: I don’t like plastic bags, the 5p ones?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: The, those ones, no, I don’t pay for them so I don’t buy them.
Interviewer: Which bags do you normally use?
Participant: I use my own bags.
Interviewer: What types of bags are they?
Participant: They are like plastic, the mesh ones, it’s just the ones you buy, the bags for life, not the plastic ones but they’re made out of like straw.
Interviewer: Oh, like a woven?
Participant: I’ve always used them, yeah, I’ve always used them.
Interviewer: For a long time?
Participant: Since I’ve moved into my own place, I just don’t like the 5p plastic bags anyway, you need to pay for them plus I never used to like, I wasn’t a big fan of them anyway.
Interviewer: What is it about them that you’re not a fan of?
Participant: They burst and then they’ve a cheek to charge you 5p.
Interviewer: So with all the heavy tins that you’re carrying?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you remember the first time that you saw plastic bags in supermarkets at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No, is it something that’s always been there?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: So you normally take these woven M&S bags with you shopping is it?
Participant: What ones?
Interviewer: You said they’re like straw?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: So where do you, do you keep those in the house do you?
Participant: I’ve got them in my car and I’ve got them in my cupboard.
Interviewer: Oh, so you keep them in 2 different places?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Can I ask how many of them you have?
Interviewer: So there’s what, 3 in the car, 2 in the cupboard sort of thing?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So you’ve always got them ready for shopping?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: And do you normally use them when you go for your everyday shopping?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is it something that’s part of your routine?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: Do you ever forget them?
Participant: No, because they’re either under the trolley, the pram or it’s in my, and if it’s in my car boot I would just say, “I’m going to run out to go and get my bags”.
Interviewer: Oh you put it in the pram will you and then you take it to the shops?
Participant: Yeah, so it’s there.
Interviewer: Do you ever end up using the single use plastic bags, the 5p ones, or?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: These bags, they’re stronger than the normal ones are they?
Participant: Yeah, they’re like £4 to buy.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s a good price for them?
Participant: Yeah, because you’re using them, I’ve had them for 2 years now.
Interviewer: Oh right, have any of them ever broken on you?
Participant: No, and if they do break you can go and get them changed.
Interviewer: Oh so is that at M&S is it?
Participant: Tescos, I only shop in Tescos.
Interviewer: Oh sorry, I thought you said they were M&S bags?
Participant: No, Tescos, I only shop in Tescos.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you use any other types of bags, do you ever take backpacks or anything like that?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s important that shops try and give people the single use plastic bags, do you think it’s important to have them there?
Participant: Yeah, because how are they going to get the stuff home, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think it’d be a good thing if they completely banned them?
Participant: Don’t know, we charge them here so I don’t know. Scotland now charge for bags so, so they can’t ban them can they, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do most of your friends and family also use the bags for life?
Participant: No, my husband buys the bags, all the time.
Interviewer: Okay, can I also ask what type of bags do you use for bin liners?
Participant: Black bags.
Interviewer: The black bags?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: Whereabouts do you get those from?
Participant: Tescos.
Interviewer: Oh you buy them?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: And how about small bins around the house, do you use any plastic bags for those?
Participant: Drawer liners.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: Drawer liners, the bin, like bin bag design for small bins.
Interviewer: Oh right, and do you use your, the bags for life for anything else?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so now we’re going to talk about, a little bit about the plastic bag charge that you mentioned, so do you know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: It’s 5p and part of it goes to charity, the supermarket or they go, some people do do the charity, or something like that, I don’t know. It’s to recycle and it’s for, to keep Scotland tidy or something.
Interviewer: So the money goes to the charity?
Participant: Well Tescos give it to charity.
Interviewer: Do you know which charities they go to?
Participant: I don’t know what’s this year, every year’s different.
Interviewer: It changes by shop does it?
Participant: I think every shop’s got their own charity, some people don’t give it to charity, I don’t know how they operate it all but I just know that Tescos.
Interviewer: You think some shops don’t give it to charity, you think some shops keep it do you?
Participant: Aye, the local ones, I don’t trust them.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: You just don’t think that they do?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: Do you think they keep it for profit?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: So you think that, so Tesco give them to like local charities or is it national charities?
Participant: I don’t know, they just give it to charity, I do put money in the charity box I just don’t pay for bags.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the plastic bag charge, do you think it’s a good thing or a bad thing?
Participant: It’s very stupid.
Interviewer: Stupid?
Participant: You should have a limit and then after that yeah, you should charge.
Interviewer: What would you put the limit at?
Participant: A limit of like £10.
Interviewer: So if you spend £10 then you get, or under £10 you get a free bag?
Participant: No, under £10 you should not get a bag.
Interviewer: Oh right, so after £10 you should get a couple of bags?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, in a supermarket, yeah, it’s like you go into Fraser’s and you buy a jacket for £500 and then you need to pay for a 5p bag, now that’s just cheek.
Interviewer: It’s just cheek?
Participant: Yeah, it’s just being rude saying, “do you want a bag?”, you need to ask them, “do you want a bag?”, I work for Mulberry and if somebody goes to you, “no, we don’t want a bag”, and they’ve spent £500, £600 on a handbag, if they don’t want a bag you can’t force them to buy a bag, you know, a thing about £600, anyway, what was your question?
Interviewer: No, no, no, I was just going to say so if you spend all that money you’ve earned a bag?
Participant: You should get a bag free, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s made a difference then to people’s behaviour, the 5p charge?
Participant: Uhuh, in my place where I work yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s made a positive impact?
Participant: No, everyone complains all the time.
Interviewer: Complains about the charge?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Have you seen most people use single use plastic bags or do they use the bags for life now?
Participant: People have their big shopping and walking round the car park because they don’t want to pay 5p for a bag.
Interviewer: So what do you think the purposes behind the plastic bag charge are?
Participant: Keep Scotland tidy, it’s still a mess.
Interviewer: It’s still a mess?
Participant: Uhuh, it’s still got rubbish everywhere.
Interviewer: Plastic bag rubbish?
Participant: You don’t see plastic bags now, I don’t know, I sometimes do use plastic bags, because the takeaways and the restaurants still give you a bag.
Interviewer: So it’s not just the bags that you get from shops, it’s also take-away ones that you see around?
Participant: Mhmm, and McDonald’s and all that, they charge you for a bag as well, but people still buy a 5p bag for that, you’re not going to reuse a McDonald’s bag are you? Well, I wouldn’t.
Interviewer: Rubbish hasn’t got any better since the plastic bag charge came in?
Participant: Last year it think it was, maybe a wee bit longer, last year some point, it’s been over a year now.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s made people more aware of the environment?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s made people think more about their shopping?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It hasn’t?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How did you notice it when it came in, did it affect how you shopped?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is it something that you just dealt with, or?
Participant: Well I always keep my bags, I don’t buy, I never used to use the 5p bags.
Interviewer: And you’ve always taken your own bags?
Participant: Yeah, the big ones are stronger and fits more in, less to carry.
Interviewer: So would you be in favour of keeping the plastic bag charge around?
Participant: Yeah, as I says there should be a plastic charge but it should be a limit, like under, like say if you’re buying 3 things then obviously pay for a bag, but if you’re doing a big shop then you should get it free, at least 1 or 2 free.
Interviewer: Do you think you’ve become more aware about the environment after the plastic bag charge yourself?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is it mostly about, when you take your bags because of convenience would you say?
Participant: Yeah, suits me.
Interviewer: So in England with the plastic bag charge that might be coming up soon, have you heard about that?
Participant: Yeah, apparently it’s going to be all over.
Interviewer: All over England?
Participant: Like all over the UK, Scotland and I think Wales charge, I might be wrong, somewhere else, Scotland and somewhere else charge, but I don’t know what other place it is.
Interviewer: So when it comes to England there might be some shops that don’t have the charge, so smaller shops, do you think that would be a good or a bad thing?
Participant: I don’t know, is it not the law now?
Interviewer: I’m sorry?
Participant: Is it not the law you need to charge the bag?
Interviewer: Only for larger shops with more than 250 employees.
Participant: I don’t know then, so your wee stores, express stores won’t pay for it?
Interviewer: Well Tesco Express stores, because Tesco, but like small independent shops won’t have to.
Participant: Oh right, yeah, here see the law, everyone needs to charge for a 5p for a bag, big or small.
Interviewer: You think they should all charge?
Participant: I don’t know, a newsagent, what does it sell, nothing, just small, cigarettes and things so no, they shouldn’t charge, well, I don’t know, I don’t know, I really don’t know, I don’t shop in newsagents.
Interviewer: And how do you think about, the plastic bag charge, how do you think it compares to other charges like the congestion charge?
Participant: It’s all the same, I don’t know, we don’t get congestion charges here in Scotland.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s a fair thing to have a charge on bags?
Participant: Yeah, because you pay for quality, yeah.
Interviewer: You’re paying for the quality of it?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Of the bags that you use?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think it makes people buy the bags for life more?
Participant: Mhmm, but here’s no such thing as a bag for life because the 10p bags when you go and replace them because they charge for bags now, the retailers, they won’t give you a bag free.
Interviewer: But they will repair the bags for life would they?
Participant: No, they don’t give you a bag, I’m sure they don’t give a bag free, that’s what the girl in the Tescos told me.
Interviewer: So if your bag for life, if it broke they wouldn’t repair it or replace it?
Participant: Aye, that’s what she said because it’s the law to charge for bags, that’s what the girl in Tesco told me, none of my bags have broken so I don’t know.
Interviewer: So with the charge on plastic bags, do you think there should be other charges for plastic things as well like plastic packaging on individually wrapped fruit and veg?
Participant: No, no, because you pay enough for fruit and veg.
Interviewer: You’re paying for the what, sorry?
Participant: You pay enough on fruit and veg.
Interviewer: What sort of fruit and veg do you buy, do you buy the individually wrapped stuff or do you buy, is there a lot of plastic that comes with your fruit and veg?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is it loose is it?
Participant: It just depends what I’m going to buy.
Interviewer: But if there was a charge for lots of plastic wrapping on fruit would that change how you shop?
Participant: No, you’re still going to buy it.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen in about 10 years’ time because of the plastic bag charge, do you think it’ll have an effect then?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think people will be used to the charge by then?
Participant: Yeah. People are used to it here in Scotland.
Interviewer: They’re used to it already?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: Do you think people will start using single use plastic bags again?
Participant: I don’t know, it just depends on each individual, like my husband, regardless he says he’s not taking a bag into the shop, it’s just stupid, and he still buys the bags.
Interviewer: He doesn’t use the bags for life?
Participant: No, he buys a bag every time, 5p, and then comes home and bins it.
Interviewer: It sounds like something you don’t approve of?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What are the reasons for that?
Participant: Because it’s stupid buying a 5p rubbish bag, he only shops, like he buys 1 or 2 things, his shopping is under £10, he doesn’t do any big shopping. If he’s buying 6 bananas he would buy a bag.
Interviewer: And that’s a waste?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: A waste of money?
Participant: No, a waste of space. He brings the bag home and then he sometimes puts it in the drawer and that’s extra bags in the drawer.
Interviewer: Oh, so he keeps them all?
Participant: Sometimes I keep them for other things. My wee girl goes to nursery, sometimes they ask for wee bags to bring in for their wellies and stuff to put in her shelf.
Interviewer: So do you think it hasn’t had any effect on his behaviour then at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What do you think would happen if they increased the cost of bags, do you think that would change his views?
Participant: No. My brothers still buys the bags.
Interviewer: Oh yeah?
Participant: My brothers buy bags as well.
Interviewer: Oh right.
Participant: So it’s just a boy thing in my house.
Interviewer: Have you ever told them not to do it and to use bags for life?
Participant: No, no, it’s up to them.
Interviewer: How about the rest of your family, do they all use bags for life or do all the guys use single use plastic bags?
Participant: My mum uses the bag for life but she done the same as me, always use it because it’s easier and [?? 28:14]
Interviewer: Okay, so we’re just going to talk a little bit now about some environmental behaviours that you might do around the house, so do you save water at home?
Participant: No, why would I save water? What do you mean by saving water?
Interviewer: Trying to minimise the amount of water that you use?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It’s not something you’ve ever thought about is it?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Stuff like turning off the tap when you brush your teeth or filling up the kettle with only as much water as you need?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is it something that you’ve never thought about, or?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Who pays for the, or how do you pay for the water bills can I ask?
Participant: My husband.
Interviewer: Do you know how often he pays, does he pay it monthly or yearly, or?
Participant: Oh, I don’t know.
Interviewer: How about saving electricity and energy?
Participant: I switch all the lights off, I don’t like too much bright
Interviewer: You don’t like it being too bright?
Participant: Mhmm, if it’s not necessary for the light to be on I’ll switch it off.
Interviewer: Is that to make it less bright for you or is it to save?
Participant: Not to save just because what’s the point of having it on if you’re not in the room?
Interviewer: So it’s waste?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Are there any particular things as well like turning off the lights, do you do anything other?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Things like jars or plastic containers?
Participant: No, it’s stupid, it just creates too much rubbish.
Interviewer: Creates rubbish?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: How so?
Participant: My granny does, she’ll just use anything, reuse anything that can go into it.
Interviewer: And you don’t believe in that?
Participant: No, because it’s too much mess.
Interviewer: So do you recycle the things that you use then?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is there any reasons for that?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is that too messy, or?
Participant: I just put it in the bin.
Interviewer: Do you take your waste then, do you put it in the bin, the waste, do you put it in the bin?
Participant: Food waste?
Interviewer: Packaging items, things…
Participant: In the bin.
Interviewer: In the bin?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you ever look at the packaging in supermarkets, do you ever think about what things have too much packaging, or?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How often do you drive can I ask?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: You drive to the shops some days, you drive every day do you?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: Can I ask where you drive to?
Participant: Tesco Express and then back. It just depends where I’m going.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you ever try to reduce your car use and try and walk, or?
Participant: I walk a lot as well, but I find it really hard with my wee girl, to walk, going to the shops to go and get something then I find it hard but I’d still go on a walk, exercise.
Interviewer: Is that an important thing for you, exercising?
Participant: Uhuh, because I’ve not got the time for the gym.
Interviewer: Do you not believe in paying for gyms?
Participant: No, I just don’t have time for gym.
Interviewer: Oh right. How about eco-friendly cleaning products, do you ever use those?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Have you heard of them?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Would you ever be tempted to try one?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is it not something that you’d fancy doing?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Any reasons why?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Just something you wouldn’t do?
Participant: Well I just stick to the same products I use.
Interviewer: Because you know them?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy organic foods?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And do you support any environmental groups or charities?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Are there any charities that you support?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Which ones?
Participant: Cancer.
Interviewer: Cancer charities?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Is this something you do frequently?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How frequently?
Participant: Monthly, I pay £2 or £3.
Interviewer: And through the diary period when you’re completing it, did you notice anything about your behaviours after writing them down?
Participant: No, it made me sometimes think a wee bit.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: It made me think a wee bit, like there was a click bit where you pick and choose [?? 35:24] like water and all that, you did think when you were doing it round about the house.
Interviewer: Did it make you change what you were doing, or?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It just made you think a bit more about it?
Participant: Mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you think more about it and think, “oh, maybe I should do something different”?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What did it make you think?
Participant: It didn’t make me think.
Interviewer: It didn’t?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: I thought you said it did make you think?
Participant: No, I just wondered why were yous asking that question.
Interviewer: Oh, I was just seeing if by completing the diary it made you think about your behaviour?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what would environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Would you say that you’re concerned with environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: It’s not something that you think about?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What would you define as environmental behaviours?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think there are any behaviours that are bad for the environment?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: You don’t? Are there any behaviours that would be good for the environment?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Have you heard of climate change?
Participant: What?
Interviewer: Climate change?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No…
Participant: Aye, aye, sort of heard of it.
Interviewer: What do you think, what have you heard about it?
Participant: Like keep it, reuse and climate and less use energy stuff and that kind of stuff, but I’m not particularly interested in it.
Interviewer: It’s not something you take a personal interest in?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is it because, or are there any reasons that you don’t take an interest in it?
Participant: Just, no, it wouldn’t approach me.
Interviewer: So you don’t think about say your behaviours and the environment?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So compared with other issues in the world today like economic or social issues, how high or how low do you rank environmental issues?
Participant: In-between probably, 5 out of 10.
Interviewer: High?
Interviewer: Oh, 5.
Participant: In the middle.
Interviewer: What would be the most important thing for you?
Participant: I don’t know, I don’t think about any of this stuff.
Interviewer: Are there any particular issues that you think about or you worry about?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What would be a low importance thing for you?
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Do you think say health would be more important?
Participant: I don’t know, yeah, probably.
Interviewer: How about the economy, do you think it’s important to look after the economy first or the environment?
Participant: Economy I would say.
Interviewer: So you rank the economy as higher?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there anything you’d say is less important than environmental protection?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: But the economy comes above the environment?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: Would you like to know more?
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Is there anything in particularly that you’d like to know more about?
Participant: Economy in general, the environment, I don’t, yeah and no if that makes sense.
Interviewer: Sorry?
Participant: Yeah or no, some things I would like to know, some things I’m like not interested.
Interviewer: Is there anywhere you think you could find out more, or?
Participant: Just you send things out I suppose.
Interviewer: Do you have the internet at home, obviously you do because you did the diary, would you looks at it online, or?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Would you like to do more for the environment?
Participant: Not really.
Interviewer: Would you say that you’re an environmental person?
Participant: No, I think you gathered that though.
Interviewer: Do you think there should be more pro-environmental actions that the government encourages?
Participant: They do encourage people to do things, but it’s up to every individual if they’re going to do it or not.
Interviewer: Do you think they’re effective at making people more pro-environmental?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What sort of things do they make them do?
Participant: Carrier bag charge, throwing litter might have something to down the environment, you throw litter you get charged, people hanging about in the streets, charge you if you throw litter.
Interviewer: Do you think there should be more charges to encourage more pro-environmental things?
Participant: Some things, aye.
Interviewer: What sort of things?
Participant: I don’t know, I really don’t know.
Interviewer: Is there anything that you would like to change about your pro-environmental behaviours, anything you’d like to do more or less?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So how about your neighbourhood, is there any serious problems that you see in your neighbourhood?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: No problems?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Anything that’s to do with cleanliness or rubbish?
Participant: No, I‘m in a house so everyone’s got their own bins, and we just take them out and the big guys come and pick it up.
Interviewer: What about on your street, are there any problems that you see in your street?
Participant: No, it’s a quiet street.
Interviewer: Okay, is there anything else you’d like to add?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Okay, well thank you very much for your time.