Interviewer: So please could you tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was fine, it was pretty straightforward.
Interviewer: Was it easy would you say?
Participant: Yeah, yeah it was pretty easy, I mean it’s straightforward isn’t it, you know, yeah, there’s nothing wrong with the interviews, it was fine I think.
Interviewer: And was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: I think it would be better to, you know if you had to write out a lot of stuff that you’ve bought, so instead of that maybe look at just sending a picture of your shopping receipt.
Interviewer: Hmm.
Participant: Do you see what I’m saying? So you don’t have to go through the process of actually writing everything out, if you’ve got a receipt, you know, you can just send a picture of the receipt as oppose to writing everything out maybe, but no, that’s the only thing I can think of.
Interviewer: Yeah, you were supposed to send pictures of the shopping receipts.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so you did do that?
Participant: I forgot, I forgot, quite a few times, I’m sorry.
Interviewer: That’s okay.
Participant: I do think I remembered once or twice though.
Interviewer: Okay, and did anything surprise you?
Participant: No, no, not at all.
Interviewer: So could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: It’s just bread, milk...
Interviewer: Sorry, I mean like how often you go, where you go, how you get there? That kind of thing.
Participant: Oh right, okay.
Interviewer: The actual trip, sorry.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, okay, no problem, I don’t know, Asda I’d say maybe for a big shop and then we use the Co-op down the road to top up, like I don’t know, milk and stuff regularly, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. How often do you go shopping for your food?
Participant: I don’t know, every other day, maybe.
Interviewer: So do you like do a big shop at Asda and then go to Co-op every other day?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, that’s right.
Interviewer: And then how often do you go to the Asda?
Participant: I’m not sure, it depends really, it varies, once a month, yeah, once a month maybe or, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Okay, and how do you travel to Asda?
Participant: By car, I drive.
Interviewer: And what about the Co-op?
Participant: I drive as well.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, do you take a list with you?
Participant: Yes, yeah, I take a list.
Interviewer: And when you’re sort of choosing what food to buy what is sort of more important and what is less?
Participant: What’s more important? Value for money, quality, I don’t know, variety I suppose, it’s good to have a variety, I don’t know, but I suppose, yeah, efficiency of staff maybe but that’s different isn’t it really? But yeah, I don’t know, I suppose that’s about it really.
Interviewer: Okay. And why do you like to shop at Asda then and the Co-op?
Participant: Oh it’s not only Asda, sometimes it will be Morrison’s or Tesco’s or I suppose whichever place I’m going past.
Interviewer: So it’s more, you just pick your shop sort of based on convenience then I suppose?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I suppose, um, I don’t know where I shop most really, yeah, it depends where I’m going, if I’m going past somewhere, yeah, yeah, if I’m going past Tesco’s, I’ll use a Tesco but you know, it’s usually the Co-op because it’s down the road and it’s got a good, yeah, it’s a decent selection and there’s a discount store that’s really good.
Interviewer: Okay, and do you tend to go food shopping by yourself or with someone?
Participant: Yeah, on my own.
Interviewer: By yourself, okay.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: How much of our food goes to waste?
Interviewer: Yeah, every week?
Participant: Very little really, it all gets recycled, yeah, so nothing really gets wasted because it goes in the garden.
Interviewer: Okay, in compost?
Participant: Yeah, for compost.
Interviewer: And could you tell me in sort of five words or expressions what comes to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag?
Participant: What comes, five words that come to mind when I think of supermarket plastic bag?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Um, unnecessary, plastic, five pence, that’s one word, right, five pence, yeah?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Well that’s great if you can’t think of any more don’t worry.
Participant: Waterproof, I don’t know, plastic bag, non-biodegradable, yeah, yeah, think of fancy words to end off with, okay, yeah, I’d say that one.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you remember a time in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: [Laughs] No, no, I don’t, sorry, that’s an amazing question, I don’t know, probably when I was about two, I don’t know, less than that, maybe a baby, I’ve got no idea.
Interviewer: Okay, and what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping in?
Participant: Rucksack or you know, a bag, you know a bigger bag for life thing or something like that.
Interviewer: And do you do that automatically without thinking?
Participant: Yeah, yeah. I’ve got, we’ve got bags in the car ready, so those big bags, yeah.
Interviewer: And is that the same for like a big shop versus a little top up shop?
Participant: Yes, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, why do you like to use sort of like a rucksack and a bag for life?
Participant: Because plastic bags are bad and you shouldn’t use them because there’s no point, you should recycle bags, yeah.
Interviewer: When you say ‘plastic bags are bad’ like what exactly do you mean?
Participant: Well I don’t know, there’s just no point is there? It’s such a wasteful thing to be using plastic on when it should be used on something else like, I don’t know, they could use it for something better, I don’t know, like making syringes for the hospitals or something, you know, like that, like out of plastic or anything for a hospital, there’s so much plastic, plastic goes in anything, so.
Interviewer: So it’s like why waste plastic...
Participant: Why waste it, why waste it...
Interviewer: On a plastic bag.
Participant: ...yeah, why waste it, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because it’s a bag and you use it for life, you don’t need another bag do you? You know you buy one and then it’s, yeah, you’ve got it forever and you don’t have to buy another one.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you think that the name, the bags match the name?
Participant: Well because they do break, but you know, it’s just a good slogan isn’t it?
Interviewer: So it’s more of a slogan than an actual thing?
Participant: Yeah, yeah. It’s not like, it’s not like a warranty is it you know? Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: I suppose it does the job because, you know, people buy them because you buy one bag, you know it’s better for the environment and that’s what people say and all that so, yeah.
Interviewer: And what, you said you use a bag for life or bags for life and your rucksack, what kinds of bags for life are they? Are they like the canvas ones or the plastic?
Participant: What bags for life, though? You’ve got a variety of bag for life, you’ve got thick reusable plastic ones, um, a really big reusable plastic one, which is amazing, a couple of the fabric ones and yeah, that’s, yeah, just loads of fabric ones.
Interviewer: And so do you sort of store them in your house and then put them in your car when you go shopping or are they like always in your car?
Participant: There’s some in the car, some in the house, yeah, there’s always a few in the car just in case.
Interviewer: Yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I don’t know, I think they should start charging more for them, that’s what I think, like 20 pence a bag, you know, or something like that.
Interviewer: But do you think...
Participant: That would really piss, that would really piss people off so they’d definitely buy their own bag, bring their own bags.
Interviewer: Yeah, 20p is quite a lot.
Participant: Five, you know, because like if you did a big shop, say you used 20 bags, that’s like two quid, you know, three quid on plastic bags, it’s... I think five pence is stupid, it’s a silly, silly amount, they should be more.
Interviewer: Okay. But do you think it’s important that they sort of are available in the shops, that they’re actually there, like regardless of the price?
Participant: Ah, yeah, because they’re convenient but maybe they should have, maybe you should have paper bags, say, I don’t know, three or five pence but then if you need to buy, you know, because like you can carry small things in that, so if you wanted to buy, I don’t know, a couple of CDs or something you could just throw them in, stick them a paper bag and that’s it, you can just keep them together and it’s there, you know. But if you wanted to get something more and you wanted a plastic bag than you’d have to pay about 20p or 25p.
Interviewer: Okay, so if plastic bags sort of completely disappeared from shops, so there was like no bags, how do you think...
Participant: Well make every bag a bag for life, that would be just the easiest way and the best way to do it, wouldn’t it? Isn’t that, because no one would throw them away, only if they, you know, it would just be stupid, they’d be like “I’ve just paid £2 for this bag I can’t throw it away”.
Interviewer: So what if bags completely disappeared from shops, how do you think you would find that?
Participant: I wouldn’t honestly care I don’t think, I honestly don’t think I’d care.
Interviewer: So it wouldn’t affect you?
Participant: No, I don’t think I’d care, to be honest.
Interviewer: Because you bring your own bags anyway?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So do you ever reuse plastic bags bought in supermarkets?
Participant: What as in, what from the shops?
Interviewer: Yeah, so obviously you sort of reuse your bags for life when you go shopping, but do you ever use sort of plastic bags as bin liners or use...
Participant: Oh yeah, use them, yeah, use them as bin liners sometimes and those little tiny plastic bags for picking up dog shit, that’s what I use quite a lot of, yeah, yeah, I go through a load of those, yeah that’s about it really.
Interviewer: And roughly how many plastic bags do you think you have at home?
Participant: I don’t know, a lot, I couldn’t, I don’t know how many, sorry.
Interviewer: Like 20, 50.
Participant: No, no, more than that.
Participant: Yeah, possibly.
Interviewer: Really?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, wow that’s a lot of plastic bags.
Participant: They’re old, really old.
Interviewer: Do you have like a cupboard under the stairs just for the bags?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So you know what the plastic bag charge is then obviously...
Participant: Hmm, mmm.
Interviewer: ...the 5p charge for single use plastic carrier bags.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you remember sort of how you heard about the plastic bag charge for the first time?
Participant: How I heard about it?
Interviewer: Yeah, like what context you were in?
Participant: I don’t, I have no idea, I couldn’t tell you, it was a while ago it happened so I honestly don’t know, maybe on the radio or, I’m not sure.
Interviewer: Okay. And what do you think about the charge in general?
Participant: I think it’s a good thing, it should be more I think.
Interviewer: Should be more money?
Participant: Yeah, I think it should be more.
Interviewer: Yeah, 20p you mentioned.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And did you sort of find the introduction of the charge surprising or not?
Participant: No, not really, not really.
Interviewer: And is there anything, so obviously you think the charge is a good thing but is there anything about it that you don’t think is so good?
Participant: I’ve worked in a lot of places that have charged for like paper bags now and they just keep the profit so I don’t think it’s very good but I suppose you know, no, to be honest, like no, I don’t really think there’s anything to be honest.
Interviewer: Where do you think the money is, sort of should be going?
Participant: Where should the money be going?
Interviewer: Yeah, so you said it’s not good if it’s, if the company is sort of earning the money?
Participant: I don’t know, there’s a lot of places it could go, I mean it could go, I don’t know, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Just not to the own company?
Participant: No, it shouldn’t go to the company, that’s not what it’s, that’s not the point of it is it? It should go to, I don’t know, maybe there should be a separate 5p, you know, button on the till, but you know I mean not everywhere has a fancy, electronic till do they? They’ve still got like typing number ones. I don’t know, I don’t know how you’d do it, I don’t know how you’d do it.
Interviewer: Okay, and did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: I did, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you know when and where you heard about it?
Participant: I think it was on Radio 5, yeah, a couple of months ago.
Interviewer: Right, okay, and what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: To deter people from using them so they bring their own bags.
Interviewer: But why?
Participant: Why? Because it’s wasteful.
Interviewer: Wasting the plastic?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think the charge is sort of being successful in stopping the wastage of plastic?
Participant: I don’t know, I know a lot of people now that bring their own bags, so um, I suppose it might have done but I don’t know, I couldn’t say.
Interviewer: And did the introduction of the plastic charge in your country affect you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So you didn’t need to change the types of bags you were using?
Participant: Say it again sorry.
Interviewer: You didn’t change the types of bags that you were using?
Participant: Oh when the charge came in to effect?
Interviewer: Hmm.
Participant: Ah, no, because I’d always have a rucksack or a bag with me anyway, so, I don’t know.
Interviewer: And do you think it changed your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No, no, definitely not.
Interviewer: And do you think you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person since the charge?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And have you noticed any changes in your local area and your country since the charge came in?
Participant: I suppose, yeah, people are talking a lot more about environmental issues but I don’t suppose that is a direct result from the charge, I think that the charge came from the fact that people were talking about environmental issues in the first place.
Interviewer: So it’s kind of just a coincidence?
Participant: Yeah. The charge was a consequence of the environmental issues, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and what do you think about how the charge is sort of being applied in your country?
Participant: How the charge is being applied?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: How do you mean? So you just walk in and pay 5p for a bag?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: I don’t know, there’s no other way you could do it, is there really? I mean well unless you ordered them off the internet.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s...
Participant: Then you’d have a delivery charge then and that would be, no, no, that’s just even more money than going into a shop and doing it so I don’t know.
Interviewer: Like have you ever been into a shop and they’ve been like “Oh we’re not going to charge you for a bag” or?
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, I’ve been in places that have done that.
Interviewer: In Wales?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so it’s kind of, so that could be improved then I suppose.
Participant: But people are people you know, you’re never going to be able to, unless you have robots doing it that were programmed, people are... you know, if one of their mates comes in they’re not going to make them, charge them for a bag are they you know? It’s like people are always going to just give them away, it doesn’t matter what you do.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you think there are kind of...
Participant: Well unless you made, unless, unless you made, so you put up the charge, put up the cost of plastic bags to the companies that are buying them to give away to the public, so if you increased the price of the bags to the company that way they would put a higher value on the bags and then they’d have to monitor them more because they’d be wasting a bit more money from giving them away.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see.
Participant: That’s the only way you could do it but that would piss a lot of people off.
Interviewer: It would cost the company more than if people weren’t buying them.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, because if they weren’t paying for them they wouldn’t be making their money back or maybe if the company bought them, five pence a bag, you know, so then they’d have to or maybe like three pence a bag so they wouldn’t, you know, they’d have to make their money back.
Interviewer: So you think they should do it like that rather than how they do it now or is that just sort of a suggestion?
Participant: Oh no, yeah, that would be a suggestion of how you could do it I think, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in Wales?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you think anything needs to change or do you think it’s just fine how it is?
Participant: Well there could always be more about it, you know, there could always be more adverts and stuff but.
Interviewer: So more information?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So when the 5p charge comes into effect in England there will be some types of bag and some types of shop where the charge might not apply.
Participant: Okay.
Interviewer: Do you think that that’s fair or not?
Participant: Where and why?
Interviewer: I can’t tell you why just because I don’t know, but in England, so corner shops, basically shops with a certain number of staff have to charge so big shops basically with lots of staff have to change, charge sorry, whereas small, corner shops won’t have to just small shops...
Participant: Oh okay.
Interviewer: ...won’t have to charge.
Participant: Oh yeah, yeah, I think that’s alright because that encourages the use of corner shops, small businesses and stuff as oppose to Tesco. Yeah, I think that would be good but then you’d still have to bump up the price of... yeah, actually if you did it that way and then bumped up the price of the bags to like 20 pence and charged Tesco’s 20 pence a bag themselves, they’d be monitored and it would encourage people to go to the corner shops as well. Or but would it though? They’d just bring their own bags and I don’t think it would change anything, no, they’d just still go to Tesco’s and they’d just bring their own bags, what am I talking about? Of course they would.
Interviewer: I don’t know, you never know until you try it.
Participant: Yeah, no I think, I don’t think people will, no, no, that’s, no, I think, yeah it’s a good idea but I don’t think it would work.
Interviewer: Okay. So how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as the congestion charge?
Participant: I don’t know, I suppose the congestion charge is good because it’s cutting down on congestion, actually they’re all environmental really aren’t they? Or are they cleverly planned business ideas? That’s what I think, that’s what I think but anyway, I don’t know, I don’t live in London, I don’t suffer from the congestion charge so I never have to, you know, yeah, so I couldn’t really say.
Interviewer: So they’re similar in a sense that they protect the environment?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Potentially schemes...
Participant: Just money raising, yeah, yeah. It’s because, it’s seems like it could be just like a really, you know, it’s a way of them to go “Oh look, we are being environmentally friendly but you know we need a bit more money”, you know, but doing it by making it look like it’s for the environment but really we’re just charging you more.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what if they were going to bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, how would you feel about that?
Participant: How would that, how do you mean?
Interviewer: Do you think you would support these other charges or not? Would you be in favour of the introduction of these charges or not?
Participant: What so, from Tesco’s there would be an extra charge buying something from Tesco’s that was packaged?
Interviewer: Yes.
Participant: And not per se from somewhere like, I don’t know, a market where you can go and get fresh veg in a paper bag?
Interviewer: No, now I’m just sort of talking about in general if anywhere there were vegetables you had to charge for the packaging, so in a market, in Lidl, in Tesco, anywhere?
Participant: Okay. I don’t know, I don’t know what that would accomplish, I think they should focus more effort on trying to cut down packaging and sorting, like doing something about the actual packaging itself, not charge people for it, I think that’s quite, it’s just, I don’t know, I don’t know why, why don’t they just focus their time and effort on cutting down the amount of packaging or making the actual packaging, or the process to make the packaging more environmentally friendly because that in the long run would benefit, don’t just charge the citizens for buying the stuff that they’ve made, you know, it’s that they put out, I think that’s quite insulting to do that, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, that is, just so you know, that is hypothetical to my knowledge there is no plan to actually do that.
Participant: Okay, I understand, yeah.
Interviewer: So what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag introduction if anything?
Participant: I have no idea, I don’t know, I think a lot of people will moan first off but they won’t really care then.
Interviewer: So in ten years’ time just everything will sort of be the same?
Participant: Yeah, it will just be the same, yeah, people will just get used to it, as soon as something else happens they’ll forget about the 5p charge on bags.
Interviewer: So do you tend to save water at home?
Participant: Save water?
Interviewer: Yeah, so like sort of actively...
Participant: Turn the tap off when I’m brushing my teeth?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you have examples of sort of how you do, how you save water?
Participant: A plan? Um, no.
Interviewer: Sorry, an example of how?
Participant: Oh an example, I thought you said do you have a plan?
Interviewer: No, sorry, examples of how you, like the different things you do.
Participant: Oh okay, boiling the kettle with enough water in, turning the taps off, like I don’t know, basic stuff really, yeah, rarely use the heating I suppose that’s, you know, I don’t really know, that’s more gas really but.
Interviewer: Okay. And why do you try and save water at home?
Participant: Because it’s cheaper to save water and you shouldn’t waste water really, you know, it’s a resource isn’t it? People are, there’s places with no water and we’re just throwing it away, it just seems a bit, yeah, unfair sorry.
Interviewer: Yeah, so kind of almost immoral?
Participant: Hmm, hmm.
Interviewer: Okay. And is there, so the things that you do with the kettle and the turning off the taps, is that a habit?
Participant: Yes, yes. I had it beaten into me by my parents basically.
Interviewer: Okay, and now you just do it automatically?
Participant: Yes, yeah.
Interviewer: What about saving energy at home?
Participant: Yeah, the same, just automatically.
Interviewer: So you mentioned about the heating.
Participant: Hmm, mmm, just you know, the general stuff, turning plugs and things off and all that.
Interviewer: And again is that a habit?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And why do you try and save energy?
Participant: The same reason as the water really.
Interviewer: Okay, so money and because other people don’t have it. And do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you have examples?
Participant: Plastic bottles, like takeaway containers, you know those little plastic containers?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Like loads of those, plastic bags, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Okay, those are good examples. And why do you reuse things?
Participant: For the same reasons as the water and electricity because I don’t know, it’s just good isn’t it? It’s good to reuse stuff, I mean people, people don’t have these things some places and we’re just, it seems like we’re just wasting everything. Places, there are places where you collect for making, I don’t know, making jam or something, just reuse jam jars although there’s loads of jars and stuff around, one, yeah, loads of different things for different things.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well, reusing things?
Participant: Hmm mmm, yeah.
Interviewer: And so when you’re sort of doing your food shop in supermarkets do you ever pay attention to the packaging of the products?
Participant: What, as in the colours or the writing on it or what do you mean?
Interviewer: Anything really.
Participant: Anything, yeah, I mean weight and quantities what’s in the food and you know.
Interviewer: Okay, so more information.
Participant: I’m not drawn in by a fancy slogan.
Interviewer: So it’s not to do with how it’s packaged but it’s more...
Participant: No.
Interviewer: You’re sort of only looking at the packaging to find out information about the product?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What do you recycle?
Participant: Everything really.
Interviewer: Everything that you can?
Participant: Yeah, everything we can.
Interviewer: Is that sort of food as well as like you know most places have like a bin for food and a bin for like glass and things.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, like we’ve got a big green bin and a big white compost bin that goes in the garden and we’ve got a green bin with white bags for like cooked food and stuff like that, that gets recycled, so it’s picked up, you know, every week, I think like Wednesday or something.
Interviewer: And again is that habit?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Every day to and from work.
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: To save money, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you sort of do that automatically or do you have to think, ah I need to?
Participant: Oh no, no, this one I do actually have to think, yes.
Interviewer: So you have to sort of remind yourself to do it?
Participant: Yes, yes, definitely, 100% have to remind myself, get carried away, you know, and then I should, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you walk or cycle short distances?
Participant: I walk.
Interviewer: You do?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How often?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: So why?
Participant: Because I have a dog.
Interviewer: Okay, so you take your dog out for a walk?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. And is that something that you plan or?
Participant: No, no, just, yeah, as and when.
Interviewer: Just sort of part of your routine then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: We have done but they’re not very good.
Interviewer: So then did you stop...
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: ...buying them because they weren’t very good.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, we were going through like six times as much of the eco-friendly washing up liquid and you’d have like a pea size of Fairy, you know, Fairy Liquid, and it would just, it just works, you know and the eco stuff, I don’t know, it kind of left smears on the plates and I don’t know, it just wasn’t very good. But I’ve tried it, we have tried it though.
Interviewer: What about organic food, do you ever buy that?
Participant: Yeah, but it seems, it’s a lot more expensive.
Interviewer: How often do you buy organic food?
Participant: If it’s like vegetables they’re usually grown better so paying a bit more for like a bunch of carrots you’d think like oh it’s more expensive but really the carrots are like twice the size of the ones you get from Tesco’s you know, they’re just grown better so, you know organic stuff is usually, I don’t know, better than normal stuff.
Interviewer: So is that why you like to buy it?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. And how often...
Participant: I love cooking, I like cooking, so.
Interviewer: How often do you buy organic food?
Participant: I have no idea. Yeah, I don’t know, once a week, I don’t know, it depends, I don’t know, it depends if you see something on offer you know or something that you fancy trying.
Interviewer: And do you ever buy sustainable food? So food that goes towards sustaining animal welfare or forests or fisheries?
Participant: Say it again, do I ever buy any food from?
Interviewer: Sustainable foods, so foods...
Participant: Sustainable food?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Like?
Interviewer: So I guess like, I’m not sure, like maybe like free range food that obviously that helps to protect animal welfare for an example.
Participant: Oh right, okay, yeah, free range I suppose, yeah, free range eggs and stuff like that.
Interviewer: So just free range eggs?
Participant: And chickens and I don’t know, yeah, I suppose or Grade A stuff, best as I can, you know.
Interviewer: Okay, so with meats you tend to buy free range rather than normal?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Why do you buy free range foods?
Participant: They’re better.
Interviewer: Better?
Participant: It’s better, yeah, if animals are kept in a good environment, they’re more relaxed and the meat is better, if an animal is like thrown around and beaten it’s really tense and then it’s just, it’s just a bad way to have food, it’s not, the food is crap, the animals have a hard time and it’s just, yeah, there’s just no point so it’s always better to buy free range stuff if you can.
Interviewer: Okay. And do you support any environmental organisations?
Participant: I don’t really support any, well I suppose I do but um, not, I agree with some things and disagree with other things, you know, so yeah.
Interviewer: So you sort of agree to environmental organisations but you don’t like, I don’t know, like donate money or?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: Volunteer or anything, okay.
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So all these behaviours we’ve just talked about, so saving water, energy, reusing things, the packaging, all of that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: No. No, not really.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Things we’ve just been discussing really, yeah, like turning taps off, you know, just being vigilant and aware of how much energy you’re using and wasting and cutting down.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues and what type of issues?
Participant: I wouldn’t say I’m overly concerned but I’m definitely aware about most things. I just think being, I just think people, certain people are so ignorant to the fact of how much energy they’re using and even they’re going through so much energy and it’s just, almost like fighting a losing battle, so “Yeah, recycled, I put all my plastic in the recycling” but you’re driving around in a fucking Land Rover, fucking V6 Land Rover like fucking five litre engine and drinks petrol and you know what I mean it’s just infuriating, it’s just really infuriating, because people are so ignorant, yeah, anyhow.
Interviewer: I see what you mean. So you’re concerned about it but it’s like well it almost doesn’t matter because of everyone else.
Participant: Yeah, you know, if they want to actually do something about it, they need to go to the manufacturing side of it.
Interviewer: Yeah, I see what you mean.
Participant: First, like they need to start manufacturing energy efficiently and not wasting things there because if that, if they cut down that, that is the main source of waste is there and then if it’s filtered through, I mean the packaging or get less environmentally, you know, less hazardous to the environment, sorry, and everything will slowly sort of fall into place, there’s no point like you know, punishing the people for doing what they’ve been doing all this time, you know, and then just take it away from them , you’ve got to wean it in slowly and start at the root of it not right what’s in front of you, so yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think the environment is an important part of your identity and your life?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Because I like the environment, I like the outside, I find it comfortable, I don’t like busy like noisy town centres and stuff, well I mean not that I don’t like them, I just you know, I find peace when it’s nice and quiet, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay.
Participant: It’s wasted really.
Interviewer: The environment is wasted?
Participant: Hmm hmm for this generation of people it’s going to be completely wasted, so it’s like they’d rather look at a photo of nature on the computer than actually going outside.
Interviewer: Oh right, I see what you mean.
Participant: “But oh my God, look how amazing it looks on my Samsung S5 screen”, it’s like “Yeah, why don’t you just go fucking outside and look at the sunset” or something you know, yeah, just anyway.
Interviewer: No, yeah, I totally get what you mean.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I’m not concerned about that, I’m concerned about other people’s waste, yeah.
Interviewer: So you’re not concerned because you don’t really produce a lot of waste?
Participant: No. Well do you know what really pisses me off, right? Tesco’s, you go round Tesco’s, at the back, at the end the night and all of their waste food, they’re not allowed to give it to their staff, all the stuff that goes off, like all of the bread and all of that stuff that going off that day, the staff aren’t allowed to take it, they aren’t allowed to have it, and what they do is they through it in the bins and they have to throw bleach all over it to stop people coming over and stealing it. So then they’re just wasting all that food and then pouring bleach all over it which is just wasting all of that bleach so that they don’t, so people don’t come and take the food out of the bins, you know, and they don’t just give it to the staff...
Interviewer: Or to homeless people.
Participant: It’s disgusting, it’s like that is so much... yeah, or homeless people, that’s such a waste, such a waste, you know it’s just, I can’t believe it, I’ve seen it happen so many times, I’ve asked so many people who work for Tesco’s and they’ve all said the same thing and yeah, it’s gross. But that is where, you know that is waste, that’s just disgusting!
Interviewer: Yeah, well I can see why like you’re not concerned about your own waste when that’s happening.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: It kind of puts it into perspective a bit.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, so social issues, economic issues, health, how important do you think environmental issues are? So sort of less important, as important, more important?
Participant: Well it should be, it should be very important because I mean the environment is, everything’s environment and if it’s gone than it’s gone isn’t it, you know, so.
Interviewer: So it’s sort of as important?
Participant: But it takes all of the other parts to work together to deal with the environment doesn’t it? So I don’t know, it’s sort of like a Catch-22, I don’t know. So they all need each other, so I suppose they’re as important really.
Interviewer: So do you feel like...
Participant: No, what am I on about, it’s more important.
Interviewer: So it is more important.
Participant: Of course it is, yeah, it is, of course it is, yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, but you need the others to help.
Participant: Yeah, the others need to work together to deal with the environment or they’ve just never going to work, you know.
Interviewer: Alright, okay. So do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Would you like to know more than maybe?
Participant: Yes, well I like to know more about everything, so yeah, never stop learning see.
Interviewer: Yeah, every day is a school day.
Participant: Exactly, exactly.
Interviewer: Alright. And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay, so would you...
Participant: Because, I don’t know like growing food, stuff like that, yeah, that’s what I know.
Interviewer: So would you like to improve your skills or not?
Participant: I suppose, well they’re improving all the time, so just doing, you know, trying new things really.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not? So sort of from the government?
Participant: Yes, yes, I think at the moment they’re doing very well in Wales, in our area anyway, especially, yeah, seem to be very, very focused on it which is nice.
Interviewer: Okay, great.
Participant: And we’ve got the, oh shit, what’s it called? There’s a big thing going in Swansea Bay, I can’t remember what it’s called, the hydroelectric like Tidal are doing, that’s it, Tidal are doing, it’s going to be first in the world and they’re building it, it’s going to be like three miles long right along Swansea Bay that’s going to generate, it’s the first like in the world that they’ve ever done, it’s going to generate a ridiculous amount of energy from this lagoon, because it’s a really like sort of unique shape of a bay in Swansea Bay so they’ve putting it there which is pretty cool. So yeah, it’s sort of becoming a hub for environmental things at the moment which is nice and everyone’s been talking about it, it’s like “Oh my God, have you heard of the lagoon”, yeah, blah, blah, blah and so everybody’s sort of aware of the environment a bit more at the moment because of that.
Interviewer: And do you think there’s enough communication on environmental issues?
Participant: Enough communication?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah, but whether people listen or not is another thing, you know, so yeah, there’s always enough communication but people don’t listen, so the trick is making people listen and making people interested because unless something really shocking happens nobody’s ever going to listen, you know it’s probably going to take a meteor strike in the earth to make people realise, oh my God, we need to save the earth, so yeah, people aren’t you know, so stuck in their ways and selfish, but it’s not sure.
Interviewer: And what about the sort of the regulation in the environmental area in Wales, what do you think, yeah, so what do you think about the regulation of the environmental area?
Participant: The regulation of the environmental area, um.
Interviewer: Just like how they keep it like.
Participant: What like cutting the grass and the parks and things?
Interviewer: Yeah, I guess.
Participant: Yeah, they’re pretty good with that I suppose, they cut the grass and stuff.
Interviewer: Do you think there’s anything else that could be done?
Participant: They could grit the roads in the winter a bit better, they should get like, yeah, guys out actually putting the salt on the roads so they wouldn’t freeze over. I don’t know, sort of the roads in Swansea because they are awful but I don’t think there’s anything else.
Interviewer: So are you happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: I wouldn’t say happy but tolerate I suppose.
Interviewer: So which of your behaviours in this area are you not so happy with then?
Participant: I don’t know, really, I don’t really know. I always think you could be doing more but you know, whether you know what to do, so.
Interviewer: And are there any of your environmental behaviours that you are particularly happy with?
Participant: Walking.
Interviewer: Walking?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay. So what are the main problems, if any, in your neighbourhood?
Participant: What are the main problems?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: The one armed man that lives across the road, I’m not even going to, he’s an absolutely arsehole, Scully, it’s Mr Scully, Jan, what’s his name, the one armed man, yeah, Scully, Mr Scully and his wife Jennifer Scully, oh my God, yeah, that’s the only problem, and bird shit all over my car all the time but that’s alright, it’s better than the Scully’s yeah, he’s an arsehole. But everything else is alright though to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, I didn’t expect that answer.
Participant: If you came to my address you would literally see him, the one armed man, Mr Scully, yeah, he’s an arsehole.
Interviewer: Okay, so bird pooh and one armed man.
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Right, so everything we’ve sort of just talked about in the interview, is there anything you want to add or emphasise?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: So that’s, we’ve pretty much nearly finished, I just need to ask some demographic questions.
Participant: Okay.