Interviewer: Are there any questions that you’d like to start off with?
Participant: No, no, it was actually really good doing the kind of blog, I really enjoyed it.
Interviewer: Oh good, I was going to ask, I mean how did you find the experience?
Participant: Yeah, I really enjoyed it, it was really good.
Interviewer: Oh good, I’m glad to hear it. Was there anything that you found difficult or challenging?
Participant: No, no, nothing at all, nothing at all, it was really easy, straightforward, the questions were easy to do so no, it was perfect.
Interviewer: Lovely stuff, grand to hear, and did you find anything surprising when you were completing the study?
Participant: Not really, I suppose it kind of made me think about my recycling and how much energy I’m suing and things like that, so it was kind of, it was thought provoking but it was good.
Interviewer: Brilliant, glad to hear it. So we’re going to talk quickly now about your shopping and your routine shopping, so could you give me a description of your typical food shopping trip please?
Participant: Like what I would buy?
Interviewer: Yeah, there’s a couple of things we’ll be talking about so just what sort of things you’re after.
Participant: Yeah, I always kind of buy semi-skimmed milk, full-fat milk, I always get some fruit, bananas or strawberries, kiwi fruits, things like that. I’ve started trying to make soups again so I’m always kind of buying vegetables, either frozen or fresh. I always get sandwich stuff so we can try and take stuff in for work so I’m always getting like bread, cheese, kind of meat, that sort of thing, coleslaw and stuff as well, and we really like eggs so that’s always on the list, and just kind of snacks, we do tend to, I try and get healthier snacks like kind of Snack a Jacks crisps or low fat crisps or thing like that, but we’ve always got kind of chocolate and stuff in the house as well, which I know is not great but we’ve always got that sort of stuff.
Interviewer: It’s got be done. So it sounds like there’s quite a lot of healthy eating there?
Participant: Yeah, we try and do as much healthy eating as we can.
Interviewer: And are there any particular types of products that you look out for?
Participant: If I’m buying like tinned beans or tinned soup I tend to kind of buy brand makes, like Heinz and stuff like that, I just prefer the taste of them, but normally I just kind of get kind of butcher style meats or just the kind of own brand breads and kind of butters and stuff like that, cheeses and meat and things like that as well, I don’t really sort of kind of splash out on too much stuff like that.
Interviewer: So it’s a bit of a mixture between brand and…
Participant: Yeah, yeah, a bit of a mixture.
Interviewer: What sort of supermarkets do you go to?
Participant: I normally go to Sainsbury’s because it’s like 5 minutes round the road, it’s not the biggest though to be honest so I go there, if I’m going for a kind of bigger shop I would probably go to Tescos, but if I’m dropping my son off at the childminder I would sometimes go to Home Bargains as well just to pick up more snacky food because it’s cheaper there.
Interviewer: And how do you normally get to Sainsbury’s?
Participant: It’s always by car to be honest, I don’t really get the bus or anything just because of the number of bags I have and with the kids and stuff it’s just easier to get the car.
Interviewer: Yeah, about how far away would you say Sainsbury’s is?
Participant: Driving it’s probably like 3 minutes, and that’s if you stop at the traffic lights, so it’s really not that far to be honest, if you’re walking I’d probably say it’d be about a 20 minute walk.
Interviewer: Okay, and so that sounds like you do quite a big shop on a regular basis?
Participant: Yeah. Tescos is probably about a 15 minute drive, roughly, there is a bus, you’d have to walk down to the town centre to get the bus into Kilmarnock and then get another bus out from like the kind of bus station out from that to get down there sort of thing, so it’s not the most convenient to be honest to get there or any or there apart from by car.
Interviewer: So it definitely makes it easier to go by car?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you do, is that your, would you say a main food shop that you do on a regular basis?
Participant: Do I what, sorry?
Interviewer: A main food shop and do you did little top-up shops as well?
Participant: Yeah, I mean it depends what shifts me and my partner are working, if we’re off and stuff like that I would probably do a main shop, but if we’re kind of working I try and, I do different shifts from him so I just, I try and maybe do it every kind of couple of days so there’s stuff for him to cook for dinner if I’m not going to be there, rather than him having to worry about taking things out the freezer and things like that, so that’s, it really depends on what we’re working that week.
Interviewer: So you and your partner both work shifts?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: Oh, I see, so that can make some shopping trips difficult for you?
Participant: Yeah, it can, yeah, I normally do the shopping on my own to be honest just because he works more regular office hours so by the time he gets home the last thing he wants to do is shop, but if I’ve forgotten anything he can pick it up at the train station on the way home sort of thing but it’s mostly me that does the shopping just because I’m off more during the day.
Interviewer: Okay, I’m glad to see you’ve a system working out there.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how much of your food would you say goes to waste each week?
Participant: We used to be really bad actually, now I try and like if I’m buying like mince and stuff I’ll half it and I’ll try and like if I’m buying a big lot of chicken breasts I’ll cut them into portions just to try and help with our portion control so we’re not overeating, so definitely not as much as what it used to be, and now that I’m doing soups [?? 06:30 crackling on the line] soup and that’ll get eaten over a few days, but I would still say there is like some waste, bread and stuff, I don’t know if it’s just me, I’m really bad at buying loaves but I always find that like when I get three-quarters of the way through the bread’s went off, so I’m always buying bread and binning about a quarter of a loaf every couple of days.
Interviewer: I asked you about waste and you said that you used to be quite wasteful?
Participant: Yeah, we used to be really wasteful, just binning a lot of stuff, overcooking and things and now I’ll definitely like kind of cut mince and stuff like in half like the big packets and like chicken and stuff I’ll separate it all just so that I’m cooking the right amount rather than overcooking it and it just going to waste, so that’s something I’ve definitely been mindful of the last kind of few months.
Interviewer: So what led to this change in being a bit more…
Participant: Just wasting food, we never used to have like a food caddy that you kept in the house for like binning food waste, it all just used to get like, you would have to like take it outside to your kind of main recycling bin, I never really like bothered so I just used to bin things and never really paid attention to what I was doing, but when they introduced this food caddy and I was putting the waste into that so that I could take it outside I realised I’m really throwing away a lot of food which is unnecessary, so I really try to kind of cut back what I was cooking, it’s just like our weights as well, rather than just sitting stuffing our faces I thought let’s just try and watch what I’m cooking, watch what I’m eating, and I’m not wasting as much, so I’m not spending as much money, I’ve sort of saved a wee bit of money as well, so I’ve noticed those changes.
Interviewer: Oh, so you’re seeing some benefits?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Oh wow! Oh, that’s very interesting, thank you very much.
Participant: No problem.
Interviewer: So talking about the shopping as well, we’ll talk a little bit about bag use when you’re shopping, so can you please tell me roughly four or five words or expressions that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Flimsy, essential, not long lasting so what would that be, not durable, I’m just trying to think what else, poor quality, expensive, that’s all I can think of.
Interviewer: So overall would you say it’s very positive or negative?
Participant: I think it’s, I get why they’re doing it, it’s probably a positive to be honest, I think people should be careful how many bags they’re using, so yeah, it’s probably a good thing to charge, so it’s probably a good thing to charge 5p a bag for the environment, and I’m guilty of using, well I use, I buy bags all the time because I use them for like taking, wrapping our lunches in so that I can put them in the fridge or put them in my partners bag, and then I use plastic bags like around the house in the wee household bins, I do tend to buy them every time I go, I never really take bags with me, but half the time now when you buy them there’s only like, to be honest Sainsbury’s is actually quite good, there’s are, they’re not like bags for life but they’re almost as good quality, they’re quite thick, but I notice like when you go to, I went to Tescos yesterday and like I got home and every single bag was ripped just because of packing and stuff so you don’t really, you don’t get good quality bags when you’re paying for them these days, so it’s not the best.
Interviewer: So even though you know, you’ve got the charge but you’re still happy to pay for them to make it useful?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I just, yeah, just because I do use them around the house, I don’t tend to buy like the actual bags for life, the ones at like 10p just because I do end up throwing them away or I’ll actually try and recycle them as well, like if I’ve got a bit lot of plastic in the house I would just put them all in a plastic bag and just take the bag out to the bin rather than carrying it, so I do recycle all my plastic bags, if they don’t actually go in the bin, but I wouldn’t really buy a bag for life unless I’m buying wine or like alcohol or something just so that the bag’s safer.
Interviewer: Yeah, there’s something heavy you want to carry?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: How about the different types of bags for life, you’ve got the really thick ones?
Participant: Yeah, I mean they are, they’re good, I’ve noticed that the bags you can buy now are great, you can even buy like ones that are like £1 that are really, really big, I noticed last year when I was doing my Christmas shopping in Sports Direct they charged you for bags, I think it was like £1.50 or something but you could put like all your shopping for the day in it, it was really good quality too so they’re probably a good idea if you’re going round like a kind of, what do you call them now, I’ve forgotten the name, like a kind of indoor shopping place, so that’s, I would probably buy like a bag for life in one of the stores and take it down so I could put all my shopping in it just so it’s easier to carry.
Interviewer: Would that be something that you’d think about or are you happy with the way you’ve got it at the moment?
Participant: For food shopping I’m happy with the way I’ve got it just now, yeah, I would spend it on a bag for life for food.
Interviewer: Yeah, sounds like they get used quite a lot as well, so once you use them after the store?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh, I do, I just, I wrap everything in them and like take them to work, put them in my bag and take and take them to work so I can them in the fridge at work and my partner does the same so yeah, I don’t really see the point in spending too much money on a bag, I just kind of reusing it and then recycling it.
Interviewer: And then I guess you’re happy not to pay for bin liners themselves but you use these?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t really, for the big pedal bin I buy bin liners but that’s the only bin liners I buy?
Interviewer: They’re the big black ones?
Participant: Yeah, the big black ones, yeah.
Interviewer: I see, and where do you keep all these plastic bags?
Participant: Underneath the sink [?? 15:06] absolutely massive so I just kind of put them all like in one bag or another bag and just sit them all under there so there’s plenty of room actually.
Interviewer: Do you know how many roughly there are?
Participant: Actually, I actually went in this morning and I looked and there was probably about 20 of them under there, so I probably actually could them to the shops and start using them again but I just, I never do.
Interviewer: No, no, no, that’s fine, that’s fine. So I’m guessing that you’ve also heard about the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah, is that something they do down in England and Wales yet?
Interviewer: It’s coming into England in October.
Participant: Yeah, we’ve been doing it up in Scotland for a while, maybe a year now…
Interviewer: I think so, yes.
Participant: …so it’s something that we’re just, we’re actually used to now, and I don’t even, I think it’s a good thing for the environment because it makes you think about how many bags you actually need and use, so I think it is a good thing.
Interviewer: How much is the charge in Scotland?
Participant: It’s like the wee single kind of thin ones it’s only 5p, that’s the ones that I would buy, and then the kind of thicker ones that you get, like the bags for life are 10p, so they’re not overly expensive, and then you can actually buy like big like proper bags as well which I think are £1 or something depending on what store you go into, I know Home Bargains if like, it’s not a bag for life but it’s almost as good quality and they’re 10p, but you don’t mind paying that because it’s actually it’s a really good bag, your shopping’s not going to ip through it, but like I said when I was in Tesco yesterday I bought 8 of the 5p ones and every single bag when I got home had a hole in it so they all had to just go straight in the recycling, so it just depends where you really go how good quality the bag is you get.
Interviewer: And the said the charge is a good thing because it makes you think about your bag?
Participant: Yeah, definitely, I mean I used whenever I’d go to Asda or Sainsbury’s or whatever, just, you could help yourself, I would just use loads and loads of bags just for the sake of it and like double bag like milk and stuff like that and all that kind of thing because you just didn’t think about the wastage of them, but now that you are paying for them you look at your shopping and you go right, I think I’ll probably need about, I don’t know, 6 of them and it’s things like juice, like big bottles of juice or big packets or cans that I used to put in bags, I don’t even bother putting them in bags any more, I just leave them in the trolley and I just put them out of the trolley into the car, so it does make you think about how many bags you actually really need.
Interviewer: Yeah, so you say it has changed the amount of bags that you’ve taken?
Participant: Yeah, definitely, I don’t take nearly as much, nowhere nearly as much.
Interviewer: And how do you feel about paying the 5p for these bags?
Participant: Well when I first heard it was coming in I though God, that’s a bit of a cheek, especially if you’re kind of out like buying clothes or you’re buying expensive stuff and you have to pay 10p for a bag and you’ve spent a fortune, but now that we’ve been doing it for that long I just think well, do you know what, it’s probably good for the environment, it makes you realise that you don’t need to take, you don’t need to buy bags, you can actually take bags with you, bags for life and go shopping with them and stuff, so I think it’s much better for the environment and I think up here the money that they get for them actually goes back into the environment, like environmental things in the area and kind of all over Scotland, so you know the money’s getting used for like a good thing, that’s why I don’t really mind paying for it.
Interviewer: You think it’s doing your part?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Yeah, you mentioned as well clothes shopping, and you have to pay for the charges there as well?
Participant: Yeah, mhmm.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s a fair system to have it in clothes shops as well as food shops?
Participant: Yes and no because I’m trying to look at the positives of it and where the money’s going from it, but sometimes you have a, I think it’s a bit of a cheek when you’ve just maybe spent £100-odd on clothes and, but I suppose it’s only 5p for the bag and sometimes like the bags are you know, like if it’s, I don’t know, a designer shop, it’s a proper designer kind of bag and it’s only 5p so it’s not a big issue, I don’t think, to be honest not one person here, up here complains about it, they all think it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: Oh wow! So it’s very positive among the people that you know?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, very positive, yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: That’s really interesting. A slightly odd question, do you remember the first time in your life that you came across supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Yeah, it was probably when I used to go shopping with my mum a lot like when I was really young so probably back then when you were like really young and you used to ask to carry a bag that was full of your sweets or something is probably one of the first times I’d remember plastic bags, I think.
Interviewer: Is it something that you always remember, shopping?
Participant: No, no, just when you kind of made me think about it there, but no, it’s not something I would ever think about.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you very much, and were you, jumping back and forth a bit I’m afraid, but you mentioned English plastic bag charge, so would you be in favour of their charge coming in?
Participant: Yeah, I think it’s a good thing, as long as like up here the use the money to put back into like what’s going on down in England if it’s parks or whatever for the environment, I think it’s a, I think it’s a good thing, I know that a few of my English friends when they come up they’re think, “oh that’s ridiculous”, and I say to them it seems that way but see once you’re kind of used to it and you know why they’re doing it it’s actually a good thing, so I think it’ll be a positive thing when the whole of the UK eventually do it, I know that kind of really small businesses and things, I don’t think they have to do it up here yet, but I know that like McDonald’s and stuff charge you 5p when you get a take-away like from the drive thru so you’ve almost got no choice, it just becomes part of your routine I suppose.
Interviewer: It’s something that you factor in when you’re going shopping?
Participant: Yeah, and it’s only 5p and you’re buying like 4 bags it’s only 20p on to your shopping, it’s not a big deal.
Interviewer: And you mentioned that some people might have exemptions, so in England shops that have less than 250 employees won’t have to charge 5p.
Participant: Oh really?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Wow! That’s quite a big number of people.
Interviewer: Yeah, so how would you feel about that?
Participant: It’s obviously different from up here because I mean it’s really pretty much everywhere apart from like really kind of small like boutiquey type shops, which you know, have maybe only got like 5 members of staff, and most of them do charge, it’s just they don’t actually have to as yet, and I think they will eventually but I don’t know when but that’s quite a large number of staff to have to not have to charge for bags, so.
Interviewer: Surprising?
Participant: Yeah, surprising, that’s probably the best word for it, a bit surprising, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think it would be fair if they lowered that number?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I think it should, I think because up here the money’s getting used for a good cause I think everywhere should do it, so if we can cope with it I’m sure everywhere else in the UK could cope, cope paying for a 5p bag.
Interviewer: Yeah, to help those environmental causes?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Do you know which particular causes they go to?
Participant: No, no, I just heard that it goes back into the environment and to help with recycling and putting, it’s for the good of the environment and stuff like that, but I don’t really know exactly what causes to be honest, it would be nice to know actually if they kind of published something every year to let you know where your money’s went form the plastic bags, but I don’t know actually to be honest.
Interviewer: There’s no announcements that you see?
Participant: No, there’s not actually, no, it would be nice to get one though.
Interviewer: You also mentioned a really good point earlier that some English friend come up and they’re a bit shocked, do you think that people will get over that shock when it comes into England?
Participant: Yeah, I think so, we did so, at first like I said you thought that’s cheek like you’ve spent all that money, I mean how are you meant to carry your shopping home, I remember they used to do like the home deliveries from like Tescos and stuff like that and they had like notices up for weeks to let you know, like from the 20th of October you have to pay for your bags and stuff like, and I thought that’s ridiculous, like how are you meant to carry your shopping home, but then when you realise why and things like that, it’s actually, it’s actually a good thing, it makes you think, I think if you start, recycling’s just part of your life now and I think the more people that do it the easier it is, and you need to help the environment, we live here, it’s not for us, it’s for future generations down the line, so I think they will definitely get over the shock of it.
Interviewer: And you said like the people in Scotland managed to get over it?
Participant: Oh yeah, definitely, it didn’t take long.
Interviewer: How about the plastic bag charge in Scotland, do you think it’s had an impact on your local environment?
Participant: Well do you know, see when you used to like walk around actually now I think about it, you used to see a lot of rubbish lying around, like plastic bags and stuff just blowing about, you don’t actually see that really anymore so I think people are more conscious that the fact that they need to pay for these bags so they’re not going to waste them, so yeah, it is, it’s a good thing to help the environment, definitely, there’s no littering, I don’t actually remember ever seeing plastic nags blowing about and so yeah, it’s a good thing.
Interviewer: So you say it’s a way to make people think more about their bags?
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s really interesting, thank you very much. So obviously the charge has come into effect, but do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged where you are?
Participant: Yeah, it probably is, I think if you buy the 5p ones you’re not going to get much use out of them unless you kind of go to Sainsbury’s are the best, the 5p bags are just great, but there’s signs everywhere and you know, take your bags with you and stuff like that, and we do have a lot of bags for life now for sale, advertised when you walk into the store and at the till points, so I think we really are sort of pushed by the fact that buy these bags and it’ll last you a long time, I think even Asda do, if it breaks or something like that they’ll give you a new one for free sort of thing as well, I’m sure they were doing that, unless that was just at the start, but that’s what we done as well, see when it came in they were giving away free bags for life for a while, like the week or something before it came to let all the shoppers have bags for life, so that was quite good of them so they might do that down South as well.
Interviewer: I think so, yeah, so how would you describe nags for life, what would you think, why are they called bags for life?
Participant: Just good quality, durable, can take a lot of weight, just good bags that you could take for your food shopping and take them out clothes shopping and all that sort of stuff, reliable and trustworthy I suppose as well, they’re going to last you a lifetime.
Interviewer: So with the plastic bag charge that’s come in now, how do you think it compares to say other charges such as like a charge on extra plastic bottles or plastic packaging of individual wrapped vegetables and fruit?
Participant: See we don’t really, do you get charged for that down South?
Interviewer: It’s something that’s being discussed.
Participant: I mean like up here, I know that up here we don’t get charged for that yet but I think if you can reduce the amount of packaging then it’s probably a good thing, I notice now you can get a lot of like refillable coffee stuff and things like that so if you can be mindful of how much packaging we buy, but I can’t speak for everyone but I recycle absolutely everything, so I know that if I buy something that’s got a lot of plastic I’m going to recycle it so it doesn’t, I haven’t really thought about that one because I know that I’ll recycle it anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah, and how do you think he plastic bag charge would compare to say an increase in fuel duties for the environment?
Participant: Well I would hate to pay more money for fuel, I really would because I just think fuel’s expensive enough as it is, and I need my car for work because of the shifts that I do, sometimes I’m nightshift, backshift, I’ll finish at really obscure times so I need my car, so I really wouldn’t want any more extra money on fuel to be honest, I’d rather pay more money for bags, I’d rather pay £1 a bag than pay more money for fuel.
Interviewer: Are you willing to pay that high?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I’d probably start reusing them for my shopping and stuff like that as well, but yeah, I rely on my car for work and for travelling for work and stuff so I would hate to have to pay more money for fuel.
Interviewer: So do you think the 5p then, do you think it’s a good price or do you think it could be higher?
Participant: I think for the bags that don’t last 5p is perfect because they’re not good quality, I don’t know if the quality’s got worse because you have to pay for them, I don’t know, but 10p for a bag for life I think’s a great price and I know because you can get different bags for life, you can choose how big or whatever, how much money you want to pay, but I think 5p for the ones that are really bad quality is just more than enough, yeah.
Interviewer: So now the charge has been introduced and it’s been in Scotland for about a year now, what do you think will happen in about 10 years’ time, do you think the charge will still be effective?
Participant: Yeah, definitely, it’ll still be effective and probably higher I would imagine, but yeah, I would, I don’t think that’s something that’ll ever go away.
Interviewer: You think it might be higher?
Participant: Yeah, I think they might even scrap the 5p bags and make everything 10p and over, just gradually putting it up just to really make people think, so, yeah.
Interviewer: And in your eyes would that be acceptable?
Participant: Yeah, I mean if it’s going to help you recycle and stuff then yeah, definitely, I know that a lot of supermarkets they give you out boxes and stuff as well now which are free so even if you could bring your own boxes shopping and stuff like that so, I think yeah, if it helps the environment it can’t be a bad thing.
Interviewer: Oh brilliant, thank you very much.
Participant: Welcome.
Interviewer: Okay, so we’re going to move track slightly, we’re going to talk about some behaviours that you might or might not do around the house, do you save water at all?
Participant: Do I waist, sorry?
Interviewer: Save water.
Participant: Save water, I mean like I would, I’m probably not the best at saving water but like when I’m cleaning my teeth I do try and turn the tap off and stuff like that, I’m trying to watch how long I’m in the shower for so that I don’t waste water, but I do like a bath now and again so I probably could be better to be honest. We don’t have like grass, we’ve only got AstroTurf, we don’t have plants, so we don’t water anything, so we probably save water by not doing that, but I could be more mindful.
Interviewer: And how about energy, electricity and gas?
Participant: Well yeah, I’m very much switching all the sockets off, my partner’s very much, “why are you doing that?”, so yeah, I don’t like leaving things on and, for saving money but also I’m always scared of some sort of electrical fault and there’s a fire or something like that, so I’m very like, even the hob and the kind of switch for the oven, that’s always off, everything’s, the only thing I would leave on during the day is like the kettle so I can make tea, but I turn like the toaster, I turn everything off, I don’t leave anything on standby, I don’t think there’s any point when you’re not in the house to waste electricity, heating, I think I’m a warm person whereas he’s probably a colder person so there’s always a battle over the heating, but I mean thankfully he’s not here during the day so I don’t have to have it on, so that’s a good thing, so yeah, I try and be mindful, like I don’t have it on a timer, it was on a timer when we first kind of moved into this house and I just thought what’s the point in down the stairs getting warmed up at 6 in the morning when no one’s down there, so I turned it all off and we just, we have to automatically like go in and manually turn it on and I just think that’s better because then you have to, you control it yourself rather than it coming on, it was set for 4 times during the day every day and I thought what is the point, what’s the point in that, especially if we’re out working so.
Interviewer: With the shifts?
Participant: Yeah, with the shifts and like I didn’t see any point in a house getting heated up when no one was in it.
Interviewer: So how about reusing things at home?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I used to make jam and stuff with my mum so I used to save a lot of jars, but now I don’t live at home I don’t really do that sort of stuff anymore, but I know that she does, so I save jars for her, sometimes I’ll save jars for my gran because she makes a lot of jam, Tupperware’s if it’s a good like Tupperware I’ll keep that for like if I’m cooking and stuff like that, like putting things in the freezer, so I try and reuse what I can and what I can’t reuse I’ll just recycle. Water bottles, I always keep water bottles so I can take them to the gym, so I’ll always like refill water bottles.
Interviewer: Are they ones that you bought say outside?
Participant: Yeah, ‘ll buy maybe like 2 and we’ll use them for a while and then when they get really bashed I’ll just recycle them and buy 2 more and then just reuse them, so that’s what I’ll do.
Interviewer: And how about, you said earlier that you recycle everything.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Could you give a little description of what that is?
Participant: There’s a food caddy which you keep under your sink, so you put a disposable, like a biodegradable bag in that and you put all your food in that and then you take that out to the food caddy outside and that’s picked up every week, so I do that, there’s the plastics, I do all that, there’s like glass and like cans and foil and stuff, that box also takes electrical, I do that, garden, you can do like garden waste but I don’t really have a lot of garden waste to be honest because I don’t have plants and I don’t cut grass so, but there is a bin for that, and then there’s cardboard and paper and then there’s like the general waste, our bins have now been cut down to once every 3 weeks for general waste, so it’s quite a drop, it was once every 2 weeks, so it was, everyone was complaining about it and I’ve got a lot of nappies that I kind of throw away, I don’t have the kind of washable ones, but they did was they gave you like nappy sacks which were like scented and you can put all your nappies in there and leave them outside and they collect that every week. I don’t really, I didn’t like it at first but it’s okay now but I think what I’m going to have to do is go out and buy like a bin because I’m scared animals would open them and didn’t give you a bin for it, so I always like, I mean the bags are all free but I always like put them in 2 or 3 and I mean they’re really, really thick bags and I’ll just put them in that because I’m always, that’s the last thing you would want to go out to, so I think I’m actually just going to go and buy like a wee bin or something and put it outside just so that I can keep them in that, and to be honest my bin’s not full really every 3 weeks, so it’s actually worked out okay to be honest.
Interviewer: Even with that change from 2 to 3?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, because I think quite a lot of the time it was nappies that I was filling in it and they took up quite a lot of space so now that they are just getting picked up every week separately every 3 weeks is actually fine, it’s not been an issue once, to be honest.
Interviewer: Sounds like you’ve adapted pretty well.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, yeah, everything’s always daunting when you hear about it and then you think, “I don’t want to make that change”, and what are you going to do, and then you have a change and it’s fine and you just think, “oh, what was I moaning about?”, so.
Interviewer: And with the plastics, can you recycle the bags with that as well?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh, they’re quite good, see depending on what Council area you’re in, some of the Council’s say you can only have them in the box but down here there’s a leaflet that says if you have too much plastics put them in a plastic bag and put it next to the box and everything gets picked up, so yeah, I recycle all the plastic bags as well that have got holes and stuff in them, so no it’s great, you’ve not got an excuse really to be honest.
Interviewer: And you said that you often drive a lot, you have to drive with work, do you ever drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Mhmm, yeah, I’ve actually, it’s got like an economy button in the car so I always have that on, I’m always up in 5th gear, the car doesn’t have 6th gear unfortunately but I’m always up in the gear that I should be and I drive yeah, fuel efficiently, so I don’t really have air conditioning on unless I need because I know that uses fuel, so yeah, I’m really mindful of that as well.
Interviewer: How about eco-friendly cleaning products, do you use those?
Participant: No, I’ve not, I don’t really use them, I’ve never really investigated like what benefits they have it’s probably something that I actually should do and I noticed that was one of the questions on the blog so I use a lot of like just sensitive stuff, no-bio stuff, because my partner’s like allergic to a lot of stuff and I’ve got kids and stuff like that, but no, I don’t, that’s something I really need to kind of look into and start using probably.
Interviewer: Is that to avoid the chemicals?
Participant: Yeah, I don’t really, I don’t really like the, I prefer, it’s leaves residue and stuff on your washing and things so, and I know that you have to use sensitive stuff for kind of kids so I just use that now for the whole family and it’ just as good, like Fair or Persil, but I have seen it, when I noticed that question on the blog I seen some stuff in the shops and I just thought I’m going to have to really look into what’s probably more environmentally friendly and give that a try actually.
Interviewer: But you haven’t tried them yet?
Participant: No, I haven’t tried them yet, no.
Interviewer: That’s fine, how about organic food and sustainable food?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I do, yeah, I do buy that now and again, I don’t go out and specifically look for that though, it’s more when you’re trying to feed a family you’re trying to get the best you can with like the cheapest budget and like a lot of organic stuff is quite expensive, but I try and get like decent meats and stuff like that and I have bought organic chickens and stuff and I didn’t really taste much of a different if I’m honest, my friend’s friend from work, she’s got a farm and she was giving out lots of free eggs and I could taste the difference with them, they tasted a lot better, and I do try and buy like free range eggs and stuff like that rather than barn, even though barn ones are really cheap but I don’t really like the thought of all the wee chickens getting hurt so, but no, I probably should look into organic stuff more, but with the shifts and things a lot of my veg is frozen, which I know is probably not the best, but if I don’t buy it and use it in a couple of days it just goes off, so it’s more kind of frozen stuff, I don’t buy tinned it’s more kind of frozen veg that I buy, unless I’m going out to buy stuff for sup, which I make there and then, but I should really be better at organic actually.
Interviewer: That’s absolutely fine, and do you support any environmental organisations as well?
Participant: No, well kind of, I don’t really know, I was thinking about getting solar panels put on the roof, is that the sort of thing that you mean, or?
Interviewer: Organisations, sorry I meant like charities and things like that?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: Do you support any charities?
Participant: Nothing that I do direct debit but if I ever, I always put money in the wee tins and stuff for cancer charities, animal charities, stuff for the refugees and things like that, I donate quite a bit of stuff for that actually recently, I kind of do my bit when I can.
Interviewer: Lovely, thank you very much.
Participant: No problem.
Interviewer: So how concerned or how environmental would you say you are?
Participant: One a scale of what, 1 to 10 or?
Interviewer: Whatever’s easiest, yes?
Participant: I don’t know, maybe if it was on a 1 to 10 probably like a 7 I think, I try and do the best I can recycling wise and energy wise and food wastage wise and try and drive as efficiently as I can, but I do, I don’t save as much water as I probably should and I do drive more than I should, I could take the train into Glasgow and I don’t, I get the car, so I definitely, there’s a lot of scope for improving, so maybe like a 6 or 7 out of 10.
Interviewer: But is it something that you feel guilty about then, it sounds like…
Participant: Yeah, uhuh, I do, when I think about it I just think, “God, you’re so lazy, why do you not just get the train?”, and I’m like that, “because I’m lazy”, so I just get the car, so I’m like that yeah, I do feel a bit guilty about it to be honest, I know I do good in other areas so I don’t beat myself up about it but I know I could do a bit better.
Interviewer: So there’s some bit that you can do good and some bits that you feel there’s areas…
Participant: Yeah, areas I could improve in, yeah.
Interviewer: What’s the, you said some areas you think you do really well in, is that like the recycling?
Participant: Yeah, recycling, I would say that I’m really strict with that and I do recycle everything that I possibly can and I do switch off all the power in the house when I don’t use it and keep the heating off when I don’t need it, so I would say those were the areas that I do good in.
Interviewer: So thinking about the environment and thinking about other issues in the world as well, so just social and economic, how important would you rate environmental concern among the other problems?
Participant: I would say it’s fairly high, I know there’s all the stuff with the refugees going on which is just awful as well, but I think the environment is something, it’s one of those things that we need to protect it because if we don’t then we’re not going to survive as a race, so it’s really dependant on us and we need to make changes now so that there’s going to be a planet in years to come, I would say it’s really, really, really important to be honest, probably at the top with a lot of other things, I think we should really be mindful, yeah.
Interviewer: Is it thinking about future generations?
Participant: Yeah, definitely because it probably won’t affect us, we’ll probably be dead by the time anything bad would happen and you would hate to think the world would be in a bad place because of stuff we’d done now when we could have changed it, so I know that a lot, I don’t know if it’s Germany or not, but a lot of the countries over that way like recycling’s like a legal requirement, you must recycle so I think that’s something that should happen. Whenever I go to America there’s no recycling at all so I think a lot of countries really need to kind of get with the programme and help out.
Interviewer: Yeah, sounds like you’ve experienced a few other countries?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I know that some countries it’s like, it is a legal requirement and I think that’s a good thing, I really think you should recycle, it’s not difficult, it might take you an extra 10, 15 minutes a week to get things put in different bags but it’s worth it in the end up, it’s just laziness just putting everything in the bin.
Interviewer: Yeah, you think we should be definitely trying to encourage more people to recycle then?
Participant: Yeah, I think everyone should do it, once you start making small changes it gets easier and easier and you should just all do it.
Interviewer: Thinking about how you feel about the environment, do you feel like you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Probably not, but I’m terrible, I don’t like watch, I like watching the news but I don’t like, I don’t really, I’ve got enough dramas and I don’t really pay attention to some things because I don’t really want to know about all the polar bears dying because I just feel bad about it, but I probably should pay more attention, and politics I should pay a lot more attention to, and the environment I should pay a lot more attention to it, actually sit and read up on it because then I would know what I was talking about, so yeah, I should pay more attention.
Interviewer: But is it because like you’re saying you feel like you’re overloaded then?
Participant: Yeah, probably, I mean the whole refugee thing and that wee boy in the paper I was like I can’t even look at that, I don’t want to know because it’s just heart breaking and, but that’s the sort of stuff that you should, you should know about and you should read about and you should be aware of but I just, I just, I don’t know, I just find it hard to watch, so the environment is probably not as hard to watch but I don’t like to hear about species dying and things like that and other countries destroying rainforests because I just, I feel sad that mankind are doing that to the rest of the world, but I should pay more attention so that can help stop it.
Interviewer: Do you feel like you can do enough to help?
Participant: Like I said I could do more, I could definitely do more to help, I could probably donate to more charities or look at the way I travel and go do you know what, I actually could walk the 10 minutes to the bus and get the bus to work and you know, try and get the bus back and stuff like that, so there is, there’s definitely more that I can do to help.
Interviewer: Do you think that there would be a need then for the government to help you out a bit more, to help you be more sustainable?
Participant: I suppose, but then you just think the government give out enough money, like where would they find the money to help more, but I know like, it’s like one of those ones if the buses had more times, like better times when they started and finished I would be able to get them, but then not everyone would use them so is it efficient for them to put a bus at a certain time when there’s no one on it apart from me, so it’s one of those ones that it’s hard to get a balance.
Interviewer: Definitely, oh right, well thank you very much, that’s really good to hear. Also just to talk quickly now because I know we’re close to time, what are the main, thinking about your local neighbourhood, what would say are the main problems in your local neighbourhood?
Participant: Well this is quite a new neighbourhood, it’s a new build estate so really the problems right now are just totally kind of superficial, it’s just things like when are they going to stop building houses and move on, so there’s not really any main kind of issues, there’s no park close by yet because there’s not been one built, which I would to see getting built soon, there’s not really antisocial behaviour to be honest, my next door neighbour’s dog’s really vicious, that’s annoying, but no, there’s nothing really, there’s nothing really negative to be honest about here, maybe in a year’s time when everyone’s settled in it could be a different story but so far everything’s good.
Interviewer: It’s a very, very new estate?
Participant: Uhuh, yeah, very new.
Interviewer: I see, okay well that’s my list of questions, I’m conscious of time so is there any last points that you’d like to clarify or add anything?
Participant: No, no, it was really good and it was thought provoking and it made me kind of think about what I was buying and stuff like that, I know that for the fridge one starting in November I’m probably going to try and do my research and make more of sort of eco-friendly products and stuff like that so I’m hoping that by then I’ll be able to have a better shopping list to give you, so no, thank you for your phone call, it was great.
Interviewer: Thank you very much.