Interviewer: Could you please tell us how you found filling in the diary, the experience overall?
Participant: It was OK, it was OK. One of the things which was awkward, I think, was remembering to pick up all the receipts, because in most shops you just, well, not in most shops, but in a lot of shops, you know, I just don’t take the paper, do you follow me?. Hand the cash over and that’s it, you know, that’s it. But otherwise it was fairly straightforward.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you about the study?
Participant: The truth? The truth was I didn’t think it was as extensive as what it could have been, OK? I think that it maybe should have been a little bit more detailed.
Interviewer: Could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: My typical food shopping trip is probably once a week, once a week and I usually, this is the main shop OK, to be absolutely honest, at the moment I use ASDA because it’s local, it’s convenient, it’s open goodness knows how long, and it’s convenient for me, OK. Now if I was honest and say that if I wasn’t living where I am in the circumstances that I’m in, then I would be very much looking to do a number of smaller shops in, what shall I say, smaller retailers rather than the supermarket, OK? But at the moment I just use the supermarket because it’s convenient.
Interviewer: And how do you travel to the ASDA store?
Participant: Oh by car, by car, because basically I live fairly isolated.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, like do you take a list with you or not?
Participant: I’m getting a bit older so I don’t tend to remember things, but the straight answer is no, I make a note of what I’m short of and then I run from that, and I just go in there and I go down the aisles and I just see things that I need, if you know what I mean, you know, I do have a mental list of things that I’m short of.
Interviewer: And what to you is kind of important when you’re choosing what food to buy and what is less important?
Participant: Right, important for me to buy. One is local, I always buy, no, not always, I buy as much as possible local and UK produce.
Interviewer: What is your reason for that?
Participant: Because I believe in, I believe in ecology and the fact that we shouldn’t be spending money on food miles, that local produce tends to be unusual, well not unusual, but better quality because one it’s picked when it’s riper, you know, there’s a whole list of reasons. I’m supporting the local economy because basically, all that money that’s spent locally tends to be also spent locally rather than going to multinational companies where the money is not filtered back to the, to where it should be.
Interviewer: So is there anything else that is kind of important to you when you’re choosing what food to buy?
Participant: Quality, and healthy.
Interviewer: And when you go on your weekly shop, do you normally go by yourself or do you normally go with someone?
Participant: I go by myself.
Interviewer: And how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: Ah, very little, very little.
Interviewer: Oh that’s good.
Participant: Very little. No, I’m, I’m a believer that if you’ve got something left it’s used, it’s used. The only thing that’s wasted is I do like to feed the birds and I have got a dog.
Interviewer: So could you tell me in five words or expressions sort of what comes to your mind when you hear supermarket plastic bag.
Participant: Basically, ooh, five words, um, oh crumbs that’s difficult. You might have to condense it. Basically, I think it’s a waste, I think people are mindless in the fact that they don’t reuse their shopping bags. What else? And money-grabbing bastards, if you want to put it down all right.
Interviewer: And do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: The straight answer is no I don’t. I’m knocking on a bit, so basically, presumably it would have been going back to the age when they produced better quality plastic bags as a service for a few customers.
Interviewer: So when you go shopping, what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping in?
Participant: One, I take my own which is a lifelong bag, and two, if I’m in one of, usually ASDA or Lidl, I use their cardboard boxes that they have in the aisles, and use those.
Interviewer: Oh the ones that already have sort of produce in them?
Participant: Yeah, the ones that have been used for the produce and they’re just, usually the two, Aldi or Lidl that I use, leaves them out in a thing and you just basically take whatever box you want and I usually use those.
Interviewer: And when you say lifelong bag, is that like a canvas tote bag?
Participant: A canvas bag, yeah, a hessian bag or something like that.
Interviewer: So do you kind of bring those bags with you automatically without thinking, or…?
Participant: Reasonably so, basically they sit in the car, so the straight answer is I always have them in the car.
Interviewer: And is that the same if you’re going on like a small shop, I don’t know, to a corner shop say if you’ve forgotten something, would you bring your canvas bag with you as well?
Participant: Yeah, they’re always in the car. The only time they’re not in the car is when they’re stacked up in the kitchen and I’ve forgotten to put them in the car.
Interviewer: So you keep your bags in your car and/or in the kitchen?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So in your opinion, how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I would say that it’s, I don’t think they should be there, to be absolutely honest. If I was there I wouldn’t have any plastic bags there and I think there would just be a hessian bag that you paid a premium for.
Interviewer: So if plastic bags completely disappeared from all supermarkets, how do you think you would find that?
Participant: It wouldn’t bother, it wouldn’t bother me one little bit.
Interviewer: So you don’t reuse any plastic bags brought from supermarkets because you don’t buy them, I suppose?
Participant: I don’t buy them. To be absolutely honest, I tend to have to go out if I want to use plastic bags for anything, and I have to specifically buy plastic bags for the job I want a plastic bag for.
Interviewer: What kind of job might that be?
Participant: Well basically, er, what did I do, what did I have the other day? Oh I collect, basically I picked some winberries off a hill, so I had to go into the supermarket and buy some re-sealable freezer-type bags, and those are the bags that sit on the shelf and I use them for pretty well anything.
Interviewer: But even then it’s not like the plastic bags that the stores, you know…
Participant: No.
Interviewer: …put your shopping in and… OK. So I assume you know what the plastic bag charge is, living in Wales?
Participant: The straight answer is, no I don’t! Well I never use them, I never use them so I’m afraid I don’t know.
Interviewer: So the plastic bag charge is a national charge of 5p for single use plastic carrier bags.
Participant: OK, yes.
Interviewer: So in Wales you’re charged 5p…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …but in other places they’re free, basically.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So yeah, do you find it surprising that this charge exists?
Participant: No I don’t, basically 5p is nothing. I would put it up and yeah, I’d, you know, I’d say 10p was a deterrent more than anything else and it’s, use that 10p for doing something with the environment.
Interviewer: So what do you think is good about the charge?
Participant: It deters people from having them, from, you know, because basically they just put them into the bin. Or they’re just, let go of the rubbish and you see them on the side of the roads, goodness knows where.
Interviewer: And is there anything you think is not very good about the 5p charge?
Participant: No, nothing at all.
Interviewer: Did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October this year?
Participant: Yes, I’m aware of that. Do you want me, I’ll add a comment to that and say that it is probably one of the very, very few things that the Welsh government has actually pioneered in their legislation.
Interviewer: Yeah, I suppose. Do you know when and how you heard about the charge being brought into England?
Participant: I think it was a BBC programme whereby they were interviewing people about it, and to be honest, I was absolutely horrified about the amount of people that were complaining about it, and that they didn’t understand that it was actually already introduced in Wales.
Interviewer: Sounds like quite an interesting programme, I wish I would have caught that. So what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Say it again? What does the…?
Interviewer: The main purposes.
Participant: Oh the main purposes. Basically to deter people from using plastic bags and it, fouling the environment.
Interviewer: OK, and do you think that it is kind of successful in doing that?
Participant: Yes it is. Reasonably successful, yes.
Interviewer: OK, so did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in Wales affect you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: I suppose if you didn’t even know about it, it couldn’t have. So do you think you were already using your canvas bags before the introduction of this charge maybe?
Participant: Was I? Well I wasn’t using plastic bags, I was basically using containers, so I always had a box in the car, so the straight answer I was doing things before yeah.
Interviewer: So yeah, maybe that’s why you didn’t notice it…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …coming in. OK. So I suppose it hasn’t really affected you at all because you were already…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …ahead.
Participant: That’s right.
Interviewer: So did you notice, this is kind of a hard question, but did you notice any changes after the introduction of the charge? I suppose it’s kind of hard if you didn’t know when it was introduced.
Participant: Well the straight answer is I see less plastic bags littering the environment.
Interviewer: In sort of your local area?
Participant: In the local area, yes.
Interviewer: So do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: Ooh. Probably not.
Interviewer: Do you think that that should be changed?
Participant: I think it should be changed, yes.
Interviewer: So it should be more encouraged?
Participant: More encouraged.
Interviewer: When the plastic bag charge comes into effect in England, I think it’ll be slightly different to the one in Wales in that it will, it will only apply to certain shops, so bigger stores will have to charge 5p for their plastic bags, but smaller stores won’t. Do you think that’s fair?
Participant: The straight answer is, yes I think it’s fair but I don’t especially agree with it.
Interviewer: So why do you think it’s fair and why don’t you agree with it?
Participant: I think it’s fair because the small shop should be encouraging people to visit them, if it’s part of that service then they’re able to give a plastic bag without a charge, that’s fair enough. But I also disagree in the fact that I don’t think that anybody should be, have a plastic bag without paying for it. A better system would be that if it was paper bags, as in biodegradable paper bags, so in other words the smaller shops would be allowed to give away paper bags free of charge, and then that would get over the problem.
Interviewer: Yeah, OK. Yeah, that’s a good compromise.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, so for example, like a congestion charge?
Participant: Too cheap! It’s too cheap.
Interviewer: The plastic bag charge is too cheap?
Participant: Yeah because basically it costs you a quid to park in the car park, to go into the shop in order to buy the produce that you charge 5p for the plastic bag for. So if you really realistically come down to it, 5p is far too low.
Interviewer: And would you support the idea of an introduction of other charges, so for example if they were to charge for plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And like a charge on plastic bottles?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: I would hope that, I’d like to see some development outside the box regarding packaging bags.
Interviewer: So, sorry, so packaging, what kind of packaging?
Participant: All kinds of packaging because, crumbs, I’m interested in environment, OK, and I read and I’ve done some work on biodegradable plastic carriers and goodness knows what, I think they’re made by a number of companies nowadays, which are completely biodegradable, they’re made from corn starch. Very expensive and there is an industrial process that goes through. However, there is also a plastic that is actually made from plant material that is also biodegradable and I feel that that needs to be progressed further.
Interviewer: So maybe in 10 years’ time, that’ll be happening?
Participant: Yeah. So basically you, you know, you’re faced with the fact that, I’ll be absolutely honest, in the supermarket I wouldn’t anticipate fresh fruit and veg to be, they do it on some, on display that you pick your own. But I would expect it to be packaged. But it’d be rather nice for that packaging to be completely recyclable, so in other words, with the potato peelings, you put the plastic packaging in with the potato peelings because it is completely biodegradable because it actually is derived from a plant source anyway.
Interviewer: OK, so like you’d be able to put it in a compost heap?
Participant: Yeah. But basically that is, needs to be really, really pushed and somebody somewhere needs to have an out of the box idea to, how to promote it better.
Interviewer: Yeah, that would be good. Do you save water at home?
Participant: Yes, I do.
Interviewer: How do you go about doing that?
Participant: I use as little water as possible, I’ve put in a water meter, so every pint of water I use it costs me money. And that’s it.
Interviewer: And why is it that you try to save water?
Participant: Again, in my broader scheme of things, one of the natural resources of the world that is becoming short in supply and I think will become more critical, especially with global warming, is water.
Interviewer: Do you save energy at home?
Participant: Yes I do.
Interviewer: And how do you go about doing that?
Participant: Energy, energy saving lightbulbs, PIRs that only come on when you need them, turn off everything that is unnecessary, yeah.
Interviewer: And what are your reasons for saving energy as well?
Participant: One is money and two is the environment because basically I would like to see, the fact is we would become as energy efficient in the UK from green sources.
Interviewer: And are these habits do you think, or do you plan to try and save energy and water?
Participant: I try to, I try to.
Interviewer: So is it kind of automatic or…?
Participant: It’s automatic basically, because you, once you start it becomes an automatic feature.
Interviewer: Do you ever reuse things at home?
Participant: Do I ever…?
Interviewer: Reuse things?
Participant: Oh I reuse things everywhere.
Interviewer: OK, what, do you have any examples of what kind of things you reuse?
Participant: Oh crumbs, I’m a vintage car enthusiast, so I reuse cars, if you come down to it.
Interviewer: That’s really cool.
Participant: You know, I, as I said, I’m a car fanatic, but I’m not a car snob. My, my everyday car is 11 years old, it’s kept in very good condition, the biggest energy that’s used is manufacturing it, so therefore if I keep it for 20 years then, you know, I’m winning aren’t I?
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely.
Participant: And reusing things, I don’t know, what shall I do, what do I reuse? There’s not much I reuse because I don’t [?? 25:07] that much. One of the biggest grievances that I’ve got is plastic bottles and jars which, to be honest, you reach a point where you, you can’t use everything, you have to recycle them. Coffee tins, I’ve gone onto coffee tins rather than coffee jars because coffee tins are ideal for storing screws, nuts and bolts and that kind of thing.
Interviewer: Again, is that kind of a habit you…
Participant: Oh it’s a habit.
Interviewer: …reusing things? Yeah?
Participant: It’s a habit, yeah. I used to reuse jars, but then I found with nuts and bolts and things, they were very easy to break, and it was more, more trouble than what it was worth. But as soon as they went to I can get tins, then they’re brilliant, you know, I save all my coffee tins because I can reuse those.
Interviewer: When you’re sort of in a supermarket doing your shopping, do you ever look at the packaging?
Participant: Yes! Yeah.
Interviewer: And sort of when you’re looking at the packaging, is there anything that’s kind of important to you?
Participant: Yeah, I look at the packaging, firstly I look at country of origin, that is important to me. Secondly I look at the packaging and the fact that I look at the, what shall I say, the quality of advertising on the packaging.
Interviewer: What do you mean by the quality?
Participant: Um…
Interviewer: Like if it looks good or…?
Participant: Yeah. Whether it looks good and what actually are they trying to get across. It really irritates me, oh go on, I’m probably a Victor Meldrew here, it irritates me the false claims that they make on some of the packaging, and things like that, that really irritates me because at the end of the day, you’re, I know everybody’s trying to get their own product bought, but there is a limit as to what you can claim about the product inside, and I feel like a lot of the packaging is over-the-top. Plus the fact is then, on the cream cake counter you’ll buy a cream cake which is in the plastic packaging which is in yet more plastic packaging, and I think, you know, that is completely unnecessary.
Interviewer: What kind of false claims are you talking about out of interest?
Participant: Right. Out of interest, the one thing that really bugged me at the time was, I’m into healthy products, there was a litre of hemp milk, OK? And on it there was a Union Jack, and there are very few hemp producers in the UK, and there is only one producer, as far as I’m aware, that actually produces hemp milk. And when I looked at the packaging, they’ve got the Union Jack among everything else, and when it came down to it, it was merely packaged in the UK. So therefore, I can’t see any reason for them to have put a Union Jack on it, emblazoned across it. Now that, as far as I’m concerned, is a false claim, it’s a false packaging.
Interviewer: Yeah, because you think that it’s been made in the UK when it hasn’t.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, that’s fair enough. So basically the amount of packaging that’s there?
Participant: And the amount of packaging yeah.
Interviewer: And just honest claims being made, it’s not much to ask for is it really?
Participant: OK.
Interviewer: So do you recycle household waste?
Participant: Yes I do. Not so much at the present time, but normally, I’ve got in my own house, I’ve got a compost heap, so anything is recycled within that. Any paper packaging and everything else like that, I usually have an open fire or a solid fuel fire which is used on that. So yeah, the waste that I really produce is mainly glass bottles, glass tins and plastics, mountains of plastic.
Interviewer: But do you recycle those?
Participant: I recycle those, yes.
Interviewer: And is this kind of habitual your, you know, burning the papers and recycling things, or do you have to kind of consciously make an effort to remember to do it?
Participant: No, it’s habit now, it’s habit.
Interviewer: So you mentioned your nice car earlier…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …how often do you drive?
Participant: Oh every day.
Interviewer: So do you ever tend to save up your car trips?
Participant: Yes I do, yes.
Interviewer: What kind of encourages you to do that?
Participant: Well basically, I try to combine as many jobs as possible in one trip. That is, to be absolutely honest, habit from years, do you know what I mean, and that’s it.
Interviewer: Is that sort of to save time or…?
Participant: Yeah, well it saves money basically, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you think you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: Most of the time, yes. Most of the time.
Interviewer: Why sort of most of the time?
Participant: Because it costs money again, because if you don’t use, if you don’t drive efficiently then it costs you money again.
Interviewer: Do you walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: Yes I do.
Interviewer: How often do you think that is?
Participant: Hmm, I walk quite often actually because I refuse to pay parking charges, so I tend to park where there isn’t a parking charge and walk. Cycling, I used to cycle an awful lot, I don’t cycle at the moment because the hills are too steep!
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: Ooh that’s a good one. The straight answer is occasionally.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what…?
Participant: And the reason for that, is, to be absolutely honest, I don’t think they’re quite as effective as the non eco ones. Despite all the claims, I just don’t think they’re quite there at the moment.
Interviewer: And have you found that from experience?
Participant: From experience.
Interviewer: So you still buy them though…
Participant: I still buy them, yes.
Interviewer: …occasionally.
Participant: Occasionally, yes.
Interviewer: Do you buy organic food?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Is there a reason why you don’t buy organic food?
Participant: No, one is because it’s slightly more expensive usually than ordinary food, and secondly, again, I’ve done an analysis of what, just chemically-wise and ordinary food and organic food, and to be absolutely honest, as regards to bad chemicals, there’s not much difference, OK?
Interviewer: What about sustainable foods? So foods…
Participant: Oh sustainable.
Interviewer: …like kind of going towards protecting forests or animal…
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: …welfare?
Participant: Everything I try and do as regards, yeah, sustainable products, yes.
Interviewer: Is that in general or there’s any particular…?
Participant: In general, in general.
Interviewer: Just in general, OK. Do you support environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: Yes I do.
Interviewer: What kind of organisations or…?
Participant: Ooh crumbs.
Interviewer: Well like how do you give your support?
Participant: Basically mainly by, what’s the word, not, a certain amount of financial support, but very little. I haven’t got any surplus money, but mainly by, what shall I say, support as in trying to do the things that they want to do, if you get what I mean, it’s yeah, it’s not the financial support but it’s…
Interviewer: For more doing things?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples?
Participant: Crumbs. You’ve got me now. Well I’m vegetarian for a start. So, you know, so basically that is an environmental, one is I don’t believe in killing animals, but secondly, environmentally, and being vegetarian is far more environmentally beneficial than not being a vegetarian.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s a great example, thank you. So during the diary study period…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …did you notice anything about any of these behaviours that we’ve just sort of talked about?
Participant: No, I just did my normal, not especially normal, because basically the time slot that I had meant that I actually hadn’t done a fairly large weekly shop, if you see what I mean, except that I don’t have a weekly shop, I have a large shop once in a while, if you know what I mean. So there wasn’t an actual one of the large shops once in a while in the diary.
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Ah, basically to lead, um, oh crumbs, it’s a difficult one. To, not to ruin the environment, to actually live on this planet without using up all its natural resources and not give anything back, so my attitude is you live within nature.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you, about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m very concerned.
Interviewer: And what are your reasons for your concern?
Participant: Well basically my main concern is the fact that I feel people are very selfish, and they actually, not, as long as it doesn’t affect them, they don’t bother. It’s only when things actually change that it affects them, and then they complain, but then they’ve dug the hole for themselves in the first place.
Interviewer: What does the environment mean to you?
Participant: Nature.
Interviewer: So is the environment an important part of your identity or…
Participant: Yes it is.
Interviewer: …sort of lifestyle?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: And is it an important part of your life?
Participant: Yes it is.
Interviewer: This might be kind of hard to answer but why?
Participant: We are, in theory, in inverted commas, the superior species, but we are actually not superior in treating the planet. Sorry, I lost the question.
Interviewer: Not superior to other animals?
Participant: Well no, because we are actually part of an eco-system and therefore we might have reached the pinnacle, in theory, of our evolution, but at the moment we are standing on the heads of everything else in order to reach that pinnacle.
Interviewer: So it’s an important part of your life…
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: …sort of just because, for that reason, we’re at the top of the hierarchy?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you kind of feel like it’s our duty as being the top of that, being at the pinnacle as you say, to have a bit more responsibility for our actions?
Participant: Yes I do, very much so.
Interviewer: How concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: Very concerned.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because it’s unsustainable, it’s completely unsustainable, we should not be in this position, and basically we’re in this position because, um, what should I say, capitalism basically, it’s companies striving for profits rather than looking for environmental ways of doing things.
Interviewer: What about recyclable waste?
Participant: Recyclable waste, well, basically I think that the whole country is absolutely in a mess, there is not a joined up thinking, from John O’Groats to Land’s End. Classic is every single county council in Wales has different coloured sacks, different coloured recycling methods, and everything else. No joined up anything whatever. Absolutely ridiculous.
Interviewer: No consistency?
Participant: No consistency whatever.
Interviewer: So even recyclable waste is a bit of an issue?
Participant: Yes, because basically I live actually between three counties, and I just literally go down the road and you put completely different things in a completely different bag.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, how important would you say environmental issues are to you? So compared to sort of social, economic and health issues?
Participant: I would have said very important.
Interviewer: So environmental is kind of up there?
Participant: Yeah, because everything else follows them. Because environment influences health.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: Yes I do.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: [?? 41:05], I probably, but, yeah, I’d go back on my previous question and say, I’m open to learning from everywhere. So the straight answer is I probably don’t know enough, any information is worthwhile having.
Interviewer: So you feel like you kind of do know enough but there’s always more to be learnt?
Participant: That’s right.
Interviewer: And so, do you feel like you do have sufficient skills to physically do things for the environment?
Participant: Yes, I’ve got sufficient skills, yes.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly or not? So sort of from the government, environmental organisations?
Participant: No I don’t think so, I don’t think there’s enough sufficient support from the government.
Interviewer: Do you have any ideas on how that could kind of be improved?
Participant: Because basically, in order to support environmental issues, it has to come from the top, because at the moment the government is not putting the legislation in place because it would probably be too controversial, and it would probably affect their funding because the only way they can do it is to legislate against the bigger players within the society, which would be the supermarkets and the large manufacturing, and they won’t want to go against those.
Interviewer: Do you think that there’s enough communication on environmental issues?
Participant: There probably is, but I don’t think people are aware of it.
Interviewer: And sort of what people should be doing?
Participant: That’s right.
Interviewer: So you think there’s enough communication but people aren’t aware of it?
Participant: People are very blinkered, they only see what they want to see.
Interviewer: So you feel like there’s enough communication but people are just quite ignorant?
Participant: That’s right, yeah, that’s pretty very good.
Interviewer: What do you think of legislation and regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: I don’t agree with regulation, but I believe in legislation. I know it’s a technical issue between the two, but yeah, I don’t think that anything will be done unless it is legislated.
Interviewer: What else do you think could be done or should be done?
Participant: Oh crumbs, you’re getting me onto my social bandwagon now! Basically I think it should start at the schools. When I was a kid, I can remember the Shell posters showing the countryside, you had a different Shell poster for each month of the year. Given out by Shell as part of their, whatever it is, their campaign, publicity campaign. But at the end of the day, those had a tremendous influence on me. I don’t feel that the current teaching in schools is sufficient in order to explain environmental issues to people, to the kids, and plus the fact is, if you actually come down to it, I’m absolutely horrified, and when we say about deprivation in society and education of kids in deprived areas, how can you put forward environmental issues when half the kids that are leaving the school unable to read and write? You know, it’s just, we are failing a whole section of society, well, I won’t go in down the line, that’s my opinion, I could go on at great length about that one.
Interviewer: Are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment?
Participant: No, I wish I could do more.
Interviewer: What else do you wish that you could do?
Participant: I feel that, um, within what I’m doing I’m doing OK, but if I had more funding and time then I could do a lot more.
Interviewer: What…?
Participant: Of money and time, I could do a lot more.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples?
Participant: Well an example would be the house, and the fact that basically, well, I am doing something because at the end of the day, at present time, the house I’m living in, which is the reason why I don’t especially do a good weekly shop, is the fact that I’m doing it up as best as I can, and I’m going to build a completely eco environmentally sound house, that is completely recyclable, well no, 90% recyclable and totally zero impact on the environment.
Interviewer: Wow. As in the actual materials of the house?
Participant: As in the materials, yeah. Wooden frame building, hemp walls, not quite sure of the roof because you’ve got to use tiles, but probably slate on the roof, because again, it’s just a material. So in fact if I walked away from it, it would just collapse and end up as just a mound of compost.
Interviewer: OK, well that’s great. So just moving on now, what are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: Why did I buy this house? Basically, the problem in there is, is, I’m living near Brynmawr and basically I would have said that it is a complete waste of resources as regards to improving the social quality of the people.
Interviewer: So just general…
Participant: Just general.
Interviewer: …society?
Participant: Yeah, well basically, yes, because they’re throwing millions of quids at it. [?? 47:45] is a classic example is the fact that they put all these fancy sculptures and goodness knows what in the village and improve it and everything else, but at the end of the day, they haven’t actually improved the lives of the ordinary people living there, you know, as far as I’m concerned, that money could have been far better spent on something else.
Interviewer: What…?
Participant: But they we are.
Interviewer: …do you think they could have spent the money on instead?
Participant: Basically, they’re on about giving employment OK. Now, you’ve, I’ll go off topic here, in the fact that you’ve got these people, the young girls, go to school, they get pregnant, they have a council house, OK, and that’s been going on for generations. The men, again, have never got a job because their dad didn’t have a job and their dad didn’t have a job, because he was a coalminer and the coalmines closed. So you’re looking at a whole section of society that has got no work ethic whatever, nothing. Absolutely nothing. They’re living on state handouts which, to be honest, I’m not a socialist and I’m not a Conservative, but I think are too high because it’s not giving the people an incentive to work. It needs to be sufficient high in order for them to live in reasonable conditions, and then they put an industry in there, they spent millions of pounds putting an industrial unit in there, they employ all these people, and then basically because the people haven’t got a work ethic, they don’t put the effort into it, they work three days, don’t want to go back, goodness knows what, and then they say, “We’re not earning enough money, we’re not making profits, we’re going to close it.” Realistically, the government should actually bridge that gap and say, “OK, this factory is not going to earn any money for five years, we will support that factory in order to instil a work ethic in the people that are living there.” At the end of five or 10 years, in theory, those people that are going there have got a work ethic, they want to work five days a week, and earn a reasonable amount of money because their standard of living has improved. And the government can’t understand that psychology, and it’s basic psychology, and it’s all to do with, you know, capitalism, basically. You will have to support an industry for a period of time because realistically you haven’t got the workforce that’s got a work ethic. My little bandwagon.
Interviewer: So is there anything that we’ve talked about so far that you would kind of like to emphasise a bit more or just add anything?
Participant: No, I think it’s been fairly comprehensive, you’ve got me on my soapbox!