Interviewer: So how did you find the diary experience overall?
Participant: Yeah, it was fine, I just put in what I’d bought and what I’d recycled and things like that, it was quite interesting.
Interviewer: Was it easy for you?
Participant: Yes, I just clicked on the link, it was easy.
Interviewer: Good, anything you kind of, wasn’t that you know, a bit tedious to write down or not?
Participant: No, no, I was fine, I just wrote different things, what I do, likes of if I’m not in a room the lights are turned off and I always use my thermostat for my heating you know, things like that, I always do that anyway.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you in the diary at all?
Participant: No, no, no, not at all, quite easy.
Interviewer: Fantastic, thanks, okay, maybe then the first thing we could talk about is your typical food shopping trip, what is it like?
Participant: Well normally as I say, I do my main shop at the weekend but nearly every day, most days I go out and buy like maybe milk, bread, cakes, things like that, sweets or juice know what I mean, I always buy like, nearly every day I’m out buying something.
Interviewer: So how do you plan your shopping?
Participant: I just, whenever I get up and ready I just go, whatever I need I just go to the shop and get it, or if I’m working when I finish my work I go to get them when I finish my work to save me going back out again you know, using more petrol.
Interviewer: So it’s more like when you need something for the day you buy it on the day?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And there is no main shop as such?
Participant: Well no, I do a main shop at the weekend, yeah, I do a main shop on a Saturday.
Interviewer: And what kind of supermarkets do you go to on the main shop?
Participant: Asda.
Interviewer: Asda, yeah, and why so?
Participant: Well, it’s nearer to me, well there’s a Tesco as well but I prefer Asda, I think the things in Asda’s better quality than Tesco.
Interviewer: And where do you do your, you know, more frequent small shops?
Participant: Just Asda, it’s always Asda I go to, in my car, 5 minutes it takes me to get to Asda from where I live, so it’s convenient for me.
Interviewer: And why is important to you when you choose food?
Participant: The quality of it.
Interviewer: And what is it about the quality?
Participant: Well it’s better, likes of if you’re buying butcher meat it’s better butcher meat you know what I mean, and Asda it’s, you’re getting everything under the one roof, it saves you going elsewhere.
Interviewer: So Asda has a butcher counter or something like that?
Participant: Yes, uhuh, well it’s got the prepacked butchers, like your packs of mince and your packs of stew, things like that.
Interviewer: And apart from the quality is there anything else that you you know, look at when you choose your food?
Participant: Not really, no, I just buy the main brands, I don’t buy any cheap brands, like for your teabags it’s like Tetley you know what I mean, and butcher meat it’s the good butcher meat, I never buy anything, any of the cheap stuff because my man wouldn’t take it.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is less important for you when you buy food?
Participant: Less important?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: I don’t know what you mean, less important?
Interviewer: What is not as important when you buy food, is there anything that you just don’t worry about?
Participant: No, not really, no, if I see something that I want I’ll just buy it, it doesn’t matter whether the price is higher or whatever, if it looks good quality I would buy it no matter what the price was.
Interviewer: And then for all kind of food shops it is always Asda for you, do you go to any other…
Participant: Well last week I was at my work and there was a Marks & Spencers so I went into Marks & Spencers because my husband’ll not eat, see the Cumberland pies, like the ready meal thing, like the Cumberland pie, he won’t eat anything else, he won’t eat anywhere eels for the Cumberland pies except Marks & Spencers, so I used that that day, but mostly, 9 times out of 10 it’s Asda.
Interviewer: Do you go food shopping on your own or with your husband?
Participant: No, my husband comes with me.
Interviewer: For the Saturday shopping?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: And for the top-up shops, the small ones?
Participant: I just go myself.
Interviewer: You just go yourself, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how do you coordinate with your husband who buys what when you go together?
Participant: Well he throws things into the trolley and I throw things into the trolley, he throws things in and I pick my own things as well, know what I mean?
Interviewer: And do you take any kind of list with you, like shopping list?
Participant: No, no, no, never.
Interviewer: Is it something that you don’t like really using lists?
Participant: No, I don’t even think of writing a list, I just go and walk round every bit of the supermarket and whatever I see I put in, know what I mean, I buy.
Interviewer: And so that will be something that you are replacing like things that you’ve run out of or you know, you look at something new to buy?
Participant: Well, as I said, what I normally do is just go round each aisle and anything we see we put in the trolley, you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, and then do you select afterwards what you will take?
Participant: Yeah, likes of the next day if I’ve not got any, if my milk’s finished or we want fresh bread, things like that, or something that I’ve maybe like forgot like maybe cooking oil or something like that, I would buy it, like the wee top-ups for things that I’ve maybe not put in the trolley when I did my shopping.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you not to use some of the food so that it you know, goes to waste somehow?
Participant: Uhuh, not very often because as I say I’ll only buy the right amount that, for both of us, because there’s only the 2 of us in the house, so I don’t really buy big packets if you know what I mean, of like butcher meat, I just buy enough that would feed myself and my husband, unless somebody’s coming round for their dinner, I would buy the bigger pack then you know what I mean, if any of my family were coming round, but most times out of 10 it’s just the small packs to do myself and my husband.
Interviewer: Okay, is there anything else about the shopping that you would like to add?
Participant: Not really, as I say I just go round, my husband comes with me on a Saturday, we do the shopping then as I said through the week if we need anything I just go myself and pick up like milk or maybe sugar if I’ve ran out of sugar, different things like that, and both my husband and I like our cakes so normally I buy cakes every day.
Interviewer: I see, yeah.  Could you tell me what “supermarket plastic bag” makes you think of, if you could tell me like 5 words or expressions that come up to your mind?
Participant: Well, I wouldn’t buy the cheap bags because they burst, I always buy the bags for life and then when I go to buy my weekly shop I normally take them with me, but sometimes if I’m doing just like a wee top-up thing I’ll buy them if I’ve forgot to take them with me, if there’s none in the car, sometimes I leave them in the car so when I go shopping I’ve got them, but most times out of 10 I buy the bags for life because they’re better quality and hold, if you’re getting a lot of messages they hold the messages stronger than they wee cheap plastic bags, and they’re only a penny dearer for the bags for life, do you know what I mean, the one’s they’re charging you, the thin ones is 5p and if you buy a bag for life they’re only 6p and it’s a stronger quality bag, so I always buy them rather than the cheap bags.
Interviewer: What else does it make you think of when you hear supermarket plastic bag, what kind of words come up to your mind?
Participant: Well the only thing I don’t like is if you’re going to buy clothes you’ve got to pay for a bag then which I think’s ridiculous because you can’t walk out a shop with a dress or a jumper over your arm, so you’ve got to, if you’re going in to buy clothes, like, it’s like today I went and bought myself a shirt and I couldn’t walk out the, I had to buy a bag then because as I say I’m not walking out the shop with a blouse over my arm, do you understand what I mean?  I think, I don’t mind paying for bags when I’m doing my shopping but I disagree with paying for bags when you’re buying clothes, know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and do you remember the time in your life when you came across supermarket bags for the first time?
Participant: Well I’ve always known bags in the supermarket.
Interviewer: And when you were tiny were there already bags in the shops or…
Participant: Yes, as far as I know, yeah, as far as I can think, yes.
Interviewer: Was there any time when you know, your parents used to bring just their own bags to the shops or not really?
Participant: Not really, I don’t think my mum ever done that, no, it’s a long time ago right enough.
Interviewer: They were better than now, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: So you mentioned just now that you like to use bags for life, yeah?
Participant: Yes.
Interviewer: What kind of bags for life are these?
Participant: These are thick, the thicker plastic bags, and one’s like a, I’ve got a big blue one I always keep in the, well I always have in the house, it’s like a, I can’t explain, it’s kind of a plastic but it’s a, it’s not even like the bags I buy normally, I don’t know whether it’s a, it’s not hessian but…
Interviewer: Yeah, I see what you mean, like kind of woven bags?
Participant: Yeah, and it’s a bag for life, it’s an Asda one, but as I say the other ones I use as well is the thick plastic bags, but I always carry that big one, I can’t remember, I think it was £1 when I first bought it, and I’ve had it for God knows how long and I keep taking that with me because it’s very, it’s sturdy.
Interviewer: Does it ever happen to you to buy any you know, cheap plastic bags, you said the 5p plastic bags, or not?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t buy them.
Interviewer: Never, yeah, yeah.
Participant: I would rather pay the extra penny and get the thicker ones.
Interviewer: So you get those, when you get those thicker ones how many do you think you have now at home?
Participant: I must have about six.
Interviewer: About six of those?
Participant: Yeah, plus my big heavy one.
Interviewer: And when they come to the end of their life basically, what do you do with them when they break?
Participant: When they break I put them in the, I recycle them in the bin, I’ve got two big recycle bins outside my door on my decking.
Interviewer: And otherwise do you use them only for shopping or is there any other kind of uses?
Participant: No, I just use them for shopping.
Interviewer: Just for the shopping, yeah?
Participant: Uhuh.
Interviewer: And what does it make you, you know, why do you prefer those ones to the 5p bags?
Participant: They’re thicker and they’re better quality, and they hold more things in them and you’ve not got the fear of them bursting when you’re putting heavy stuff in them, you know, like your tins of soup and things like that, they’re heavier, much more robust than your wee thin ones.
Interviewer: And how do you they last if you remember, how long do you keep them for usually?
Participant: Well, as you say, until they break, but I would say a good few months anyway.
Interviewer: A good few months?
Participant: Yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you like or dislike about them, well you like them because they are stronger, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, they’re much stronger.
Interviewer: Yeah, is there anything that you dislike about them at all?
Participant: No, no, nothing, because as I say they’re much stronger, you can put heavy things in them and they don’t burst the same as the wee thin ones, I just wouldn’t entertain the wee thin ones, for the extra 1p you’re better with the thicker ones.
Interviewer: And did you know that you could exchange them for free when they break in the stores?
Participant: No, no, I didn’t know that, no.
Interviewer: Yeah, apparently that’s the principle of bag for life, when it breaks.
Participant: I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: Yeah, you could bring it to the store and exchange it for free.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: Uhuh, for the next one, and they recycle it for you.
Participant: Right, that’s fine.
Interviewer: And why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Because they last longer, they last longer than the thin ones.
Interviewer: And do you think that the use, how people use these bags for life matches this name or not?
Participant: Oh it think it’s yeah, uhuh, I think it’s a good idea because as I said as before they’re stronger and they last much longer than they wee stupid things, and as I’ve said to you before, they’re only a penny dearer so, some of the shops are 10p, the likes of Asda the wee thin ones is 5p and their bags for life, don’t get me wrong the bigger one I got I can’t remember how much I, I think it was £1 I paid for that because it’s the big one, but the other ones that’s thicker, the thicker plastic, they’re only 1p dearer than the wee thin ones.
Interviewer: Yeah, and why not, I mean compared to the you know, those woven bags you said, the blue thing that you have or something like that, because there are also these kind of bags for life which are quite big and you know, they can hold loads of items, have you ever thought of those, I mean why did you chose the plastic ones?
Participant: Why did I chose that one, because…
Interviewer: No, why did you choose the plastic ones, the 10p or something like that?
Participant: No, 6p they were, and the big woven one was £1 I think, because that was much bigger.
Interviewer: But instead of you know, having several plastic ones have you ever thought of you know, a couple of more bigger ones or is it…
Participant: No, I just usually buy the ones at 6p.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because it’s easier, I think it’s easier to carry when I’m doing it myself but when my husband’s there he carries the big bag, I don’t carry the bigger bag, I carry the smaller bags.
Interviewer: Where do you store your bags that you use for shopping?
Participant: In my kitchen cupboard.
Interviewer: In your kitchen cupboard, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And you always remember to take them?
Participant: Not always, that’s how sometimes I buy them when I’m out.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Oh definitely, when you’re buying, if you’re buying a big shop you definitely need the thicker plastic bags, yes.
Interviewer: And what happens if bags completely disappeared from the stores?
Participant: As I say well you’d need to buy the big hessian ones, know what I mean, you’d need to buy them because if you’re buying a big shop obviously you need bags to take your shopping home.
Interviewer: So do you think that would be okay actually?
Participant: Yeah, if there was none of the smaller bags, the thingyme ones, I would buy the bigger ones, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and you have already mentioned that you know about the 5p charge for the single use plastic bags, and when did you hear about it for the first time?
Participant: Oh, I can’t remember when it first started, was it about, I can’t remember, was that about 2 years ago, a year ago, I can’t remember?
Interviewer: Something like that.
Participant: Yeah, uhuh.
Interviewer: What do you think about this plastic bag charge, 5p charge?
Participant: Well I don’t think, if you’re buying products out a shop I don’t think they should charge you to put your shopping into a bag, I really disagree with that because as I say we’re buying products out the shop, you should be able to have something to carry your shopping home with, as I say even clothes, I really disagree, I don’t mind the supermarket but I disagree when you’re buying clothes to pay for a bag, because you can’t walk out of a shop with a dress or a pair of shoes you know, especially clothes, if you’re buying clothes you can’t walk out the shop and put them over your arm, you need a bag to put them in.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that this plastic bag charge has been introduced?
Participant: I think it’s terrible they’ve introduced it, it’s more money we’ve got to pay out when we’re doing our shopping, know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is not nice about it?
Participant: Well because you’ve got to pay for the bags to carry your shopping home, it’s extra expense when we didn’t have to pay it beforehand, now we’re paying for it, even if you’re going for the likes of a McDonald’s, they’re charging you for the paper bags when you’re buying something to eat if you’re taking away.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of this 5p charge?
Participant: I don’t know, I couldn’t tell you, but as I say I don’t think it’s fair when you’re buying things and you’ve got to pay for bags to take them home, I don’t really know what the purpose of it is.
Interviewer: Do you think it can be something related to the environment or not necessarily?
Participant: It could be, yeah, it could, make sure everything’s recycled properly.
Interviewer: When the plastic bag charge was introduced in Scotland has this you know, sort of changed your, how you use the bags?
Participant: Well most times out of 10 when I’m going on a big shop I’ll take the bags with me, do you know what I mean, that has definitely changed, rather than just going in and getting a bag, put your shopping in, most times out of 10 I’ll have a bag with me.
Interviewer: So basically what happens is that before you used to take the free bags, yeah?
Participant: Uhuh, yes.
Interviewer: And now you changed for the bags for life that you can reuse?
Participant: Yes I have, uhuh.
Interviewer: And has this changed your shopping behaviour at all, or not?
Participant: Well, I would say yes because as I say when I’m going, I remember when I’m going to get like wee top-ups I’ll try and remember to take a bag, but sometimes I forget and then I’ve got to buy another one, so most times out of 10 I’ll try and remember and take them with me, know what I mean, so I’m not using, I’m not buying X amount all the time when I go out.
Interviewer: And have you noticed any other changes after this charge was introduced?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Maybe like for what other people are doing in shops or like what the shops look like?
Participant: Oh no, I see a lot of people taking bags with them, I’ve noticed that you know, maybe at the checkout they’ve got their own bags in the trolley and they pack the things with their own bags like myself, I have noticed that in the supermarkets.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely, and have you seen any differences like how the city looks after the charge has been introduced, was there any change you know?
Participant: Have I noticed, sorry, can you say that again?
Interviewer: Yeah, like an urban environment and city environment how it looks like in terms of litter, plastic bag litter, is there a change?
Participant: Where I stay there’s not really a lot of litter anyway, it’s a nice area, it’s all wooded.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse, so basically bringing our own bags is encouraged in Scotland?
Participant: Yes, uhuh, because I have noticed that in Asda they’ve got kind of a bin to put old bags into, have noticed that, it’s like a big green bag and you put your old bags in that, I have noticed that in Asda.
Interviewer: And have you ever used it yourself?
Participant: No, because I just buy my bags when I’m there and then when I bring them down the road I try and remember and put them in my car if I’m going shopping.
Interviewer: And then also in supermarkets you know, do you think that it kind of, it is encouraged for people to bring their own bags and you know, just with them for the shopping, to pack their shopping…
Participant: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: …or not really, or is it more like yes, we will give you the bags, don’t worry, don’t bring anything?
Participant: No, as I say, that bin, I think that kind of a thingymes people to bring their own bags, and if I can remember, I don’t know, there’s sings in Asda telling you to bring your own bag or you can recycle them in that green bin, yeah, I’ve noticed that.
Interviewer: And does Asda give you any points when you bring your own bags or not?
Participant: I don’t think so, I’ve never seen it, I mean I’ve never done it and I’ve never seen it so I couldn’t really tell you, I just go in, do my shopping, pay for it, in the bags and back home, and then if there’s anything to be recycled I put it in my two bins outside.
Interviewer: Great, thank you, and another thing you know, because the same charge is going to be introduced in England, England is the last country in the UK you know, the last part of the UK that will have this charge because Wales then Scotland and Ireland have this for already you know, a little whole, and England hadn’t and is going to have it now in October, and there are going to be interesting exemptions from this charge, so things like you know, you mentioned the food, takeaways are not going to have it and clothing shops will not have it as well, and also small retailers like medium-to-small retailers and corner shops will be exempt from it so they will not charge their clients for the 5p bag.
Participant: We pay for anything, when we go even to our wee corner shops they still charge us 5p for the wee…
Interviewer: Yeah, so what do you think that the fact that in England it will be no charges…
Participant: Exempt and Scotland not exempt?  I don’t think that’s fair.
Interviewer: No, no, no, in Scotland, yeah, Scotland like and Wales it’s like a blanket basically, it’s everywhere, but in England it’s going to be, it’s going to be a little bit patchy, so those you now, corner shops will not charge, so what do you think about it, is this a good thing or not?
Participant: Well it’ll probably be a good thing for people in England but not in Scotland if you know what I mean, that’ll be good for people there because they’re getting away with going into a corner shop and getting a bag whereas we have got to pay it, so I don’t really think that’s fair on one place and then the other places you’ve go to pay, likes of us and Ireland and things like that, we’ve got to pay for it and they don’t have to pay for it.
Interviewer: How do you think the plastic bag charge compares to you know, charges on fuel for example, is it at all comparable, would you you know, would you be in favour of fuel rise, prices…
Participant: No, I don’t think the fuel rise either.
Interviewer: So you wouldn’t be supportive of that?
Participant: No, definitely not because I use my car all the time, don’t get me wrong I’ve got the eco car so it’s less emissions and things like that into the atmosphere, I’ve got that which is brilliant and it’s fuel efficient as well, it’s a wee Corsa I’ve got Eco Corsa and I mean I only pay £30 tax which is brilliant compared to the car I had before, know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, yeah, and you know, another kind of charge that, it’s not really a charge, it’s a little deposit, it doesn’t exist in the UK but it exists in other places like in Germany I’ve heard, and it’s a little deposit that people pay when they buy plastic bottled drinks, so for a bottle of coke and plastic and things like that, when they bring the bottles back, the empty bottles they get the little deposit back, those few pence, do you think it’s a good thing or not?
Participant: Yes, that’s okay, uhuh, because the glass bottles, they used to do that with the glass bottles but I think in October that’s finishing, you could take a glass bottle back to say you were in your wee corner shop, you bought a bottle of cola and it was in the glass bottle, when you took that bad I think it’s like 20p or 30p you get back, but they’re stopping that in October now so I’ve heard, you don’t get anything back for the glass bottles, so I think if it was the plastic bottles, plus I prefer the plastic bottles because if you broke them, do you know what I mean, it’s the glass everywhere where it’s plastic they don’t break, so that wouldn’t bother me paying the extra for that.
Interviewer: And would you bring your bottles back?
Participant: Yes, uhuh.
Interviewer: And what do you think will happen in 10 years’ time now you know, the charge has been introduced in Scotland, England and Wales, what do you think will happen in the UK in about 10 years as a result you know, of this…
Participant: The plastic bottles?
Interviewer: No, no, 5p charge for the bags?
Participant: As I say I think people get used to it now, they’ve got used to it, they don’t, quite a lot of people don’t think about it now if you know what I mean, because it’s just an automatic thing you’re paying now, at the beginning a lot of people, in fact a lot of people still disagree with it, but at the end of the day if you’re wanting to buy something and it’s by law you need to pay it, simple as that.
Interviewer: Now coming to a slightly different thing, you mentioned that you do anyhow you know, save energy at home, so is this something that is automatic for you?
Participant: Automatic, definitely, I always do it, and likes of when the nice weather I always turn my heating off because there’s no sense of the heating being on when it’s nice outside, plus the fact when I’m in the house myself, my husband works nightshift so at night-time I always turn my heating off at night because it gets too hot.
Interviewer: And what do you do with the household waste usually?
Participant: Well I’ve got two recycle bins outside my door so I recycle them just outside the door.
Interviewer: And what kind of bins do you have?
Participant: I’ve got a big grey bin and a big, I’ve got a brown bin, wee brown bin, I’ve got the grey bin and I’ve got the blue bin for the plastic things like that, cardboard.
Interviewer: And are you happy with these kind of recycling facilities?
Participant: Yes, because they get picked up every Monday.
Interviewer: Since they’ve been introduced have you seen any changes in what you do with your waste?
Participant: Well no because I’ve always done it, I’ve always had my, before we had the bins, it just started, at first we had one bin but they’ve started I would say maybe in the last couple of years, they put the brown bin and the blue bin there, so that[s the only thing I’ve noticed you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: It’s easier to do now because it’s just outside my door.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy things like eco-friendly, organic or Fair Trade or sustainable products?
Participant: I don’t buy organic, I don’t buy that.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: I normally just buy what I see, likes of the washing powders and things like that, I will buy the eco-friendly ones for that, my soap powder and my washing-up liquid.
Interviewer: So you buy eco-friendly, yeah?
Participant: I buy the eco-friendly ones for that.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because they’re easy I think to, when you’re putting them in the recycle bin, they’re easy to recycle, is that not what it is?
Interviewer: Maybe, yeah, maybe as well, and also I think the product itself are less toxic for the environment, but you choose those because you know…
Participant: Yeah, because, I thought they were, when you buy them they’re easy for them to recycle when you’re disposing of them.
Interviewer: And in terms of like organic food and free range and things like that, do you ever…
Participant: Sometimes I buy eggs free range but nothing else.
Interviewer: And is there a reason for that?
Participant: No, just my husband likes the free range better.
Interviewer: Okay, and what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well to keep the countryside and everything, and the nature, animals and all that, they’re dying off that quick, so if you keep the environmental friendly you’re going to have your nature and you’re going to have trees and things like that longer, that’s what I think about it anyway.
Interviewer: And how do you think people could or should contribute to preservation of the nature?
Participant: How do I what?
Interviewer: How should people you know, help preserve the nature?
Participant: Well don’t leave your litter and everything all about, and don’t kill animals that’s could be extinct.
Interviewer: And anything else you know, you can think of that is you know, helps the environment?
Participant: Not really, no.
Interviewer: Do you think that if we produce less waste would that be helpful for the environment or not really?
Participant: Probably it would, uhuh.
Interviewer: And how would it help?
Participant: Well if they’re going to, the recycle centres are disposing of them properly it wouldn’t harm anything then would it?
Interviewer: Yeah, sure of course, and how concerned are you at all about environmental issues?
Participant: Well quite concerned because I never thingyme litter or anything like that, I’m quite concerned about that.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I don’t want to harm any animals or the beauty of the trees and forests, because where I live it’s all kind of like trees and forests and things like that, so to harm these living things, plants and animals, you don’t want to thingyme them, do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, of course, yeah, and would you say that environment is an important part of your identity at all, or not really?
Participant: Well where I stay it is all trees and forests so it is quite important because it’s nice and natural and the scenery’s lovely, rather than being in a big town where it’s all buildings and things like that, I would rather stay where I stay the now with the plants and the forests.
Interviewer: Do you live yourself in an urban environment or somewhere outside?
Participant: Outside.
Interviewer: And compared to other issues in the modern society, things like social you know, issues, economic or health, how important is environment in relation to those?
Participant: Well the health is definitely important, definitely, as I say I’m not well myself so I rely on my doctor and the National Health to help me with my problem, do you know what I mean, so it’s important to me.
Interviewer: And you know, what is kind of more important priority wise, what is more important, like social, economic like employment…
Participant: Oh that’s important as well because people need to work to keep their head above water, do you know what I mean, people’s got to work, so I agree with that, they’ve got to have jobs to keep their house, their different things, know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is more important you know, those kind of things or the environment or is it kind of the same importance?
Participant: I would say the same importance, people’s got to work and if they’re not well they’ve got to have the National Health Service for people to get treated, so those both are to me they’re important.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you currently know enough about environmental issues or not?
Participant: Not really, no, I would say no.
Interviewer: And why do you say so?
Participant: Because I don’t really, I don’t do anything to the environment if you know what I mean, because I recycle my stuff and I don’t throw litter but there is people do things and I don’t really know that much about it.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know, the governments and other organisations, environmental organisations provide sufficient support for people to you know, to help them to be more environmentally friendly?
Participant: I think there is organisations out there that do, you know what I mean, like the National Trust, things like that, hey do a lot you know, for the environment.
Interviewer: Do you think that the, like you yourself do you feel that you have enough support from the government or the organisations in those terms you now, to be able to learn and…
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Not really?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you think should be done?
Participant: Well I think they should supply people with more details on leaflets and things like that to help people that don’t know really, like myself that don’t really know a lot about it, I think there should be more information given out for people to help the environment, do you know what I mean, because I don’t really know that much about it, I just know I wouldn’t put litter or anything like that, and I always recycle things in my bins, that’s really all I can, all I do you know what I mean, and likes of my eco car it’s not harming the atmosphere because it’s an eco-car, do you know what I mean, I’m not really putting any things into the air, the atmosphere.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fantastic, yeah, and are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, I’m happy because I don’t really do anything to harm anything, you know what I mean, and I paid extra for my car because I wanted the eco car so that it wasn’t putting like toxins into the air, and the long-run it’s cheaper for me because the fuel efficiency is better, there’s nothing going into the air and it’s cheaper for the tax because you’re paying extra for your car you know what I mean, because normally you can buy a Corsa for £7,000, I paid £11,500 for mine, do you understand, so that when I’m driving I’m not putting anything into the atmosphere to kill plants or, I think I’m doing that, you know what I mean, I think I’m doing well doing that to help, I think all cars could be that, but again a lot of people maybe wouldn’t pay the extra for that, but to me in the long-run I think it’s it’ll save me in the long run because I’m not using as much fuel and I’m not putting anything, as I say, into the atmosphere to kill plants and things like that.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely, that makes sense.  Well I kind of came to the end of my questions, so is there anything else June that you think you would like to emphasise or to add to what we said now?
Participant: Not really, as I say the only thing as I say I think they should send more leaflets out, the government should thingyme, give enough money for people, like leaflets so people can understand and help the environment, do you understand what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah.
Participant: That’s really the only thing, as I say, I can think of.
Interviewer: What do you think about the climate change?
Participant: It’s life isn’t it?
Interviewer: Is it what, sorry?
Participant: It’s life, everything’s got to change, do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Okay, yeah, sure, so basically this is it so thank you very much…
Participant: Thank you very much and Elena I’ll get that sent to you…