Interviewer: So maybe the first thing I wanted to ask you about is how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: It made me realise I don't do very much! I think part of it at the moment is peculiar circumstances because I had my cat run over and I've got absolutely huge vet bills I'm facing and so I've been cutting back quite a lot and just eating out of my cupboards and things like that a lot, so I haven't been doing a lot of shopping. It's just happened to coincide, you know, so yeah, I mean I haven't, there wasn't a lot to record most days.
Interviewer: That's OK, you know, because everyone's, you know, we also will, ideally we would have liked to have had an absolutely normal picture of everyone's lives but, you know, these kinds of things are also part of our life so.
Participant: Yeah, yeah, that's right.
Interviewer: Yeah, that's a pity for your cat, yeah. OK, and did you find anything, you know, particularly easy to write down or difficult on the opposite?
Participant: No not really. I found I was repeating things because I tend to do things quite regularly in terms of recycling so a lot of what I was putting down would happen every single day. Yeah, I think I've been doing more recycling than shopping!
Interviewer: That's fine, yeah, and did anything surprise you in the diary?
Participant: I don't think so, I can't remember being surprised.
Interviewer: Anything else that you would like to add to it, you know, in your sort of your own words, any thoughts?
Participant: No I don't think so, I don't think so, I, it's more if you have any questions for me because I think what was happening just went down in the diary really.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, that's absolutely fine, yeah. Yeah, I do have a few questions so maybe in the first kind of, you know, topic we could talk about precisely is your typical food shopping trip, so now then, you know, you can describe a little bit how it usually looks like.
Participant: Well usually because I don't like wasting money I tend to 'offer shop', I tend to shop when there are discounted prices, you know, at the end of the day if I'm anywhere handy, I don't purposely go out and, you know, blow petrol money to get discounted goods, and because I don't like wasting money I tend to shop largely at places like Aldi because, you know, they're just good value and I hate Tesco's with a vengeance.
Interviewer: Why?
Participant: Well because all through the recession there were other places which were selling things at a reasonable price, a cheap price, like I mean OK, Iceland doesn't have much variety, but they were selling things at good prices, and I think Tesco's were just milking it as usual and ripping people off, they had no sympathy for their customers at all and they were just charging huge prices. There's a Tesco in Chepstow and I'd have to be desperate to go there, even though it's the largest supermarket, I just find Tesco's incredibly arrogant.
Interviewer: Yeah absolutely. And how many times a week or month do you usually, do you sort of main shop or how does it look like for you?
Participant: Well usually because I'm out and about I tend to shop when I have time and wherever I happen to be. If I have to go to Newport there's an amazing shop which is called the, I think it's the Bargain Shop or something, where they sell everything which is just past the sell by date but obviously not by the use by date and at a fraction of the price, so if I'm going into Newport I would usually try and whip in there if I could, and there's also an Aldi not far away as well so I would drop in there as well.
Interviewer: And how many times a week would that usually happen?
Participant: I have no regular routine.
Interviewer: Well, from maybe in, what sort of range between how many, how many?
Participant: It depends very much where I am because I'm all over the place, you see, you know, one day I might be in Cheltenham, the other day I might be in Chippenham, the next day I might be in Newport for as you say, so if I'm near an Aldi then I'll whip in there or a Lidl.
Interviewer: Would this be rather several times a week or once a week or it will be one week once a week and another week it will be several times?
Participant: Oh yes that's right, yeah. If I'm up the top end of the valley then there's an Asda there and they sell things really, really cheaply so you can stock up your cupboards for a week with things and come out with a bill which is like £16, and I'm vegetarian you see, so all those sort of things I can mop up quite cheaply up there.
Interviewer: And does it tend to be like a big, do you tend to make like a big main shop or is it mostly like in small quantities but frequently, or both?
Participant: No, it ceased to be like a big main shop per week or something like that, or a fortnight, in the past, going way back, I would do that. Now, I would, I would just make use of what offers etc are around and depending on what was about would be, take how big a shop it was going to be but it would be much more frequent I guess than in the past.
Interviewer: Yeah sure, and you mentioned that you are vegetarian, if you could just say briefly why have you chosen to be vegetarian?
Participant: Lots of reasons.
Interviewer: What are they?
Participant: First of all, I never liked meat, I would buy meat in the past and it would be in the fridge and I'd just look at it and not want to eat it and so for that reason. Secondly, when my son was young he came back from school and he said he wanted to be vegetarian and I kind of thought 'well, whoopee, I don't have to bother with meat anymore anyway', so we're all vegetarian. But also I find the thought of eating dead carcases absolutely gross, and on a humane level I really don't want to be responsible for the death of animals which don't need to be slaughtered, you know, the fact that millions of creatures are going to their death every year I find, you know, disgusting, and often they're not brought up well. I mean if we were in the same conditions we would say that we're in death camps, you know, that they're badly looked after and slaughtered at the end of it. But because they're animals, people just don't think that way at all, they just think they're like products and I can't think of them as products at all and I've got animals and they are characters and they show such love and devotion that, you know, how can anybody treat them like that.
Interviewer: Yeah absolutely.
Participant: So on all levels basically.
Interviewer: Yeah sure, thank you. And if we come back to the food shopping, how do you plan the food that you are going to buy? Do you plan at all or not really?
Participant: I have a range of things which I look out for, the sort of basics that I look out for and some of it will be dictated by offers, I will choose from within that sort of range of things that I would normally buy according to what offers were on.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when you choose food and what is less important, when obviously the price you mentioned was an important factor.
Participant: Yeah, definitely.
Interviewer: Is there anything else apart from the price that plays an important.
Participant: Certainly quality.
Interviewer: And what would that include?
Participant: Quality is being, I'm thinking like fruit and veg, those I think I buy sort of at the end of the line, I mean I do look to make sure that the packets are blown or anything like that and I look for the sort of quality end of the fruit and veg if you like, rather than the cheap range.
Interviewer: And what is less important for you when you buy food?
Participant: Unfortunately probably feels like where it's come from. I mean obviously if I can buy local things then they tend to be better-looking and fresher etc and so I would go for those but that's on what they look like and the quality of them as opposed to being dedicated to trying to buy something which is local when there might be something that's in better condition if you like that's come from elsewhere.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and how do you usually travel to the store or to the shop, yeah.
Participant: Right, I don't make special shopping trips, it's always when I'm en-route somewhere else.
Interviewer: And do you drive usually, yeah, for that?
Participant: Yeah I drive. So if I'm working in a certain area then, you know, I would stop and shop. I don't make special trips out, unless I have to, you know, if I run out of something and I need it desperately then I might have to, but that would be the exception.
Interviewer: And why sort of, can I ask why is it this way, so why do you rather, you know, do it just on your way instead of going just for one-off shopping trip?
Participant: Why I do that, economy I suppose again, you know, I don't, when I see somewhere where I know that I can buy the kind of things I want fairly cheaply, whilst I'm out and about, and also, you know, I just don't want to be burning petrol money making special trips.
Interviewer: And do you shop usually on your own or with someone?
Participant: It varies a bit. Often on my own because I will be working, you know. If it's at the end of the day and I've met up with somebody then I'd go with them but otherwise usually on my own.
Interviewer: And if you go with someone from your family yeah, a member of your family.
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: How do you coordinate in this case who buys what? Or is there no really coordination and everyone buys what they like?
Participant: They buy what they want because they're a separate household, you know, there's nobody else in the household so I buy what I need and they buy what they need.
Interviewer: Yeah, so that would be rather friends.
Participant: Separate trolleys and everything, or else we'd divide a trolley so that we could see who's was what.
Interviewer: So that won't be people who live with you, not your family members living with you or would they be?
Participant: No, no, no, it would be other people.
Interviewer: OK, and regarding the food waste, is there any food waste that, you know, happens for you or not much? I mean just, you know, food waste that, some kind of products that you didn't have time to use or.
Participant: Oh sometimes yeah, yeah, sometimes it's 'cos packets are too big, you know, like if I'm buying like a salad in a pack I will use like half of it and then maybe, you know, there's other things to use up in between times which I'll use and then I'll look at the salad, well, you know, that's had it, so yeah, there is food waste. I mean I try to keep it to the minimum but there always is unfortunately.
Interviewer: Yeah, that's fine, I guess it happens to all of us.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK, is there anything else about the food shopping that you would like to add before we move on?
Participant: No I don't think so.
Interviewer: OK, great, yeah. The next thing I wanted to ask you about is, you know, what, well you spoke quite a lot about in the diary is the shopping bags, so the first question is a little bit unusual, it's, I would like you if you could tell me, if you would, or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear 'supermarket plastic bag', what does it make you think of?
Participant: It makes me think of wasted money to be honest because it's a lack of discipline that you don't take your own bags and it just adds onto your bill, so when I remember, which is my failing I think, to put bags back in the car then I would use those, but a lot of the time, I mean if I, if you shop at Aldi or Lidl they have boxes and so I would normally just grab a box and get my shopping in those.
Interviewer: So it's like the packaging boxes that they, you know, left.
Participant: The cardboard boxes.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: And also I've got an open fire you see and I tend to burn all the rubbish which is, like cardboard and paper and stuff that I have here 'cos I have lots of paperwork which is confidential and so I tend to burn it, and actually it keeps the house warm quite nicely, it's surprising.
Interviewer: Great, and do you remember at all that point in your life when you came across for the first time these plastic supermarket bags? Do you remember how they appeared and when?
Participant: I can't remember a date for them but it was round about the time that the Welsh Government decided, no it was before the Welsh Government decided that they were gonna put a tariff on them that they started to arrive in, it was a store initiative to start off with, and I think at one stage they were free, they were giving away like the little sort of hessian type bags and things free.
Interviewer: And the plastic ones or just, you know, the very thin, you know, whatever they are at the moment, the single use thin plastic bags, do you remember how they appeared in shops?
Participant: The single use ones?
Interviewer: Or just any plastic bags, you know, in supermarkets, basically how they sort of arrived or when approximately.
Participant: A couple of years back I would have said but the thin ones seem to be, to put people off using them if you like because they always split, so it encouraged people to fork out and buy the thicker plastic bags.
Interviewer: I do remember that to me, they encouraged me to use a double, a double bag! [?? 18:15] which was ridiculous.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: But what I mean is that, you know, when just the plastic bags appeared in sort of in, into, well not in the world but in the UK, do you remember that moment, you know, when supermarkets started to have plastic bags and what was before that? Do you remember anything about that?
Participant: It was just a, I'm thinking Tesco's, just the stripy white bags with the blue Tesco stripe on them before, that you would just be given loads of, you know, if you bought six bags of [?? 18:55] in Tesco's you, you know, they would just shell out a whole load of bags onto their, the counter and, for people to use. But there was a big televised thing as well about the amount of bags that were having to go to dumps and how they weren't biodegradable and how they were, you know, like clogging up the oceans and all this kind of stuff, so, yeah, I mean it seemed a good idea to stop people using the things. Wherever now they've got these thick plastic bags, whether they're any better for the environment I don't know 'cos there must be plenty of those around that people are buying.
Interviewer: Yeah and what was in supermarkets before plastic bags arrived at all, do you remember?
Participant: No, I just remember the plastic bags always. I mean if you went back in time, no doubt people used to take their shopping bags to a store.
Interviewer: Yeah, but it's not something that you particularly remember about, it wasn't your generation?
Participant: No, only from my childhood I remember my mother taking bags to get the shopping in, you wouldn't expect the store necessarily, you know, everything would just be sort of like wrapped up in paper or whatever and you'd take your shopping bag to the shops, so it's something which people obviously fell out of doing and supermarkets were kind of encouraging it I guess by giving people bags.
Interviewer: And why do you think they started doing it?
Participant: I don't know, I don't know, because presumably it would have been a habit for people to have taken a shopping bag to the shops. Unless, well I guess the other thought is being finacle is that they wanted to encourage people to buy more than they could put in a shopping bag.
Interviewer: Who knows!
Participant: Yeah, probably, and so, you know, if they were giving bags then people couldn't say 'oh well, you know, I won't have that today, I haven't got any room', because the bags would be there for them.
Interviewer: Yeah, we'll investigate that! OK. And coming to your own use, coming back to your own use of bags, so you said that you'll try and get the boxes in the supermarkets and [?? 21:38] kind of, yeah, any kind of bags that you use of your own also for the shopping, or not?
Participant: If I've got some plastic bags then I, when I'm disciplined I will put them into the boot of my car and use those, but that doesn't happen so much because I know I can get boxes at Aldi etc. The only time I come unstuck is if I go into somewhere where they don't have, you know, boxes I can use and then I tend to have an armful of stuff which I take out rather than buying bags. The only bags I do use is the little fruit bags that you put fruit in, you know, the little see-through things, and I kind of recycle those because I've got a little contraction for picking up dog poop and you can put those bags into them and use those like poop bags, so I use those, I recycle those, I keep those specially for it and recycle them.
Interviewer: And the plastic bags that you have at home you mentioned, what kind of plastic bags are these, is it for bag for life or single use thin bags?
Participant: Well it would be a mixture to be honest, I mean I don't tend to buy them but sometimes if somebody gives me something then they might give me one of those bags and so I have a mixture.
Interviewer: You've got a mixture, and how many do you have currently at home do you reckon?
Participant: Not anywhere near as many as I used to have, I used to have bags of bags of bags that I would keep but now I've probably just got a bag of bags.
Interviewer: About eight?
Participant: Probably if you was to stick a number on them, yes.
Interviewer: Yeah, that's fine, of course, yeah. And where do you store them? Is it at home?
Participant: I've got a cupboard under the stairs which I keep those in.
Interviewer: Yeah, and so you mentioned also that sometimes you go to places you're just not prepared really that you're going to buy something and then you have to get one, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, I might come across in some place that I don't usually visit, like yesterday I was in Chippenham, I don't know Chippenham, but if I came across like an indoor market or something and I thought, if I'd said to myself 'ooh, I could do with some extra veg or something', then I would come unstuck there, well actually I wouldn't because Chippenham give free bags with everything so I would have had bags probably then. But if I was in Wales then yeah.
Interviewer: So in Wales does it happen to you from time to time to have to buy a bag?
Participant: It happens to me that I find that I haven't got a bag and I've got stuff to transport but I would tend to transport it in my hands, and sometimes if it's small items I stick them in my handbag so that I've got enough room in my hands to carry the rest. I would say that I've bought a bag in the last six months once.
Interviewer: OK, right, was that a bag for life or was that.
Participant: It was a bag for life 'cos that's all they had.
Interviewer: And what sort of, I mean some people like to always have a little bag handy with them, like at the bottom of their handbag or something like that, in case they pop in somewhere.
Participant: Yeah, I don't have such a thing, I mean that might be an idea but thank you for the suggestion!
Interviewer: No, no, I'm not suggesting, I'm just wondering.
Participant: What a good idea, it's a good idea.
Interviewer: Is that something that you just haven't thought about or is it something that you, you know, is not practical for you, I don't know.
Participant: I just don't have one at the moment, I'd have to seek one out. Are you thinking of the sort of little things which fold down, I used to have those at one time.
Interviewer: Yeah, like nylon bags or some people have a little plastic bag with them.
Participant: Yeah, who used to have those? No, I think, funny, I have so much in my bag usually that I wouldn't want a bulky-ish plastic bag, the thin ones might be too thin to carry things in, but the little nylon bags, thinking about it, they used to have those in the supermarkets and they don't appear anymore, the little fold-up things.
Interviewer: Yeah exactly.
Participant: That fold into a bag and it's just an inch and a half square or something and they were quite handy, a bit of a nightmare to fold sometimes.
Interviewer: Yeah, and in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: I think it's still a little bit easy for some people, I mean I see youngsters particularly and they don't care about the price of the bag and they would still, you know, have a, endless bags for their shopping.
Interviewer: Paid bags still?
Participant: Sorry?
Interviewer: Paid bags.
Participant: Paid bags, yeah, yeah, and I just think 'well crumbs, that's adding onto your shopping bill and you know, you're still using bags'. If the supermarkets were to actually provide more boxes for people then people perhaps would use those instead, or they'd have to be organised and bring bags. But I mean it's become a little source of revenue for the supermarkets I think as well.
Interviewer: And what if bags completely disappeared from the supermarkets, how would you find it?
Participant: I would find it OK, unless there was such a run on the cardboard boxes that I couldn't find one at all! But if there were enough cardboard boxes around, no problem.
Interviewer: You obviously live in Wales so you know what plastic bag charge is.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What do you think about the 5p charge?
Participant: Well it's not enough to deter some people from using them for sure and I've noticed that some places, I can't think where, it might be private shops, they're charging 10 pence for a bag now, they used to be 5 pence a bag, so that seems to be creeping up a little bit.
Interviewer: And if we still think about the 5p charge, which I think it should be a 5p charge for the thin bags at least, for bags for life it's different pricing but for thin single use bags it should be 5p everywhere, that's the legislation, so I can only, you know, we can only speak about this just now, do you find the introduction of the 5p charge surprising at all or not?
Participant: I think it was coming, you know, so I wasn't exactly surprised, I just like to avoid it.
Interviewer: And what do you think...
Participant: And I think people can avoid it, you know, there's still miles too many bags around that you see.
Interviewer: Of course.
Participant: And also inside of packaging, you know.
Interviewer: Yeah, and what is good about the plastic bag charge and what is not as good?
Participant: Well I guess it has cut down on the use of plastic bags and people do tend to bring shopping bags, you do see lots of people bringing shopping bags and things, it's just the lazier people who just keep buying them and obviously they're still causing waste.
Interviewer: Yeah sure.
Participant: And I guess a lot of them are not very biodegradable being quite thick etc.
Interviewer: And did you know that the 5p charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: I think I did hear that.
Interviewer: Do you remember where from?
Participant: It must have been on a News programme.
Interviewer: Somewhere yeah, OK, and did you hear a long time ago about this or just recently?
Participant: No, it must have been some time back, I haven't seen anything recently about it.
Interviewer: What do you think about that? Because actually England is the last part of the UK that will have, you know, the charge introduced.
Participant: [?? 30:58 line breaks up] source of getting a plastic bag because when I'm across the bridge I think 'ooh, I can have a plastic bag here', which increases my little private stash of them, but overall I mean it's fine, it's fine, because it won't affect me.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge in general?
Participant: The main, sorry?
Interviewer: The main purposes of the plastic bag charge.
Participant: It's supposed to be a deterrent and I guess to some extent it is, I think it's also a source of revenue, not huge but, you know, when you're talking about the numbers that might be used it's probably sizeable enough, and overall, I mean I think it's a good thing.
Interviewer: And do you think it's, it will have, or it is already having any impacts on the environment?
Participant: I think it must be having an impact on the environment because the numbers of people who are bringing their own bags must be suggesting that there's, or else being used, I think there's so much that's already sort of in waste and in the oceans and stuff it's gonna take an awful long time for it to clear things up, you know.
Interviewer: And did you see yourself [?? 32:41] bag in Wales after, you know, after this law came in effect a bit of.
Participant: Sorry, did I?
Interviewer: Did you see any changes in Wales after, you know, the charge has been in place?
Participant: Yeah definitely, definitely people are bringing bags.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, people, yeah, people, yeah.
Participant: And I think, I think there is less rubbish blowing around than there was, that may be attributed to other things, you know, other people have become much more sort of tidier in their habits rather than just dropping stuff everywhere.
Interviewer: And when you said that there will be also an impact on the revenue, did you mean, who did you think receives the money from the 5p charge?
Participant: I think it's the supermarkets.
Interviewer: The supermarkets only, yeah?
Participant: And whoever makes the bags, I guess they, they earn out of it.
Interviewer: So you think it will just go to a supermarket profit mostly?
Participant: Probably it does.
Interviewer: Yeah OK.
Participant: That will explain the increase in charges as well, that people are thinking 'oh well [?? 34:00] bit more for this as well'.
Interviewer: When the plastic bag charge was introduced in Wales has it affected you at all?
Participant: Yes in that I would use cardboard boxes now and I would either carry things to the car if I had no bag or I would try and remember to put bags in the car, so between the three measures I cope without them.
Interviewer: And before, did you used to take free bags?
Participant: No, no I didn't. Oh, take, sorry, have free bags from the supermarket, yes, because it was easy, you know, you didn't have to remember anything, you didn't have to do anything yourself, there they would be being doled out, you know, huge quantities, and you know, you just automatically packed your shopping in what they gave you.
Interviewer: And do you remember how quickly you managed to change after the charge was introduced? Was it an easy thing to do or not?
Participant: I found it easy.
Interviewer: Did it happen to you to forget a few times, you know, just after the introduction, or did you remember kind of straightaway?
Participant: I think I changed my shopping habits in that I stopped shopping at Tesco where I was going and opted for Lidl and Aldi and places like that. So that made it easier. If I was still shopping at Tesco's perhaps I would have a problem or, you know, I would have to remember to take bags.
Interviewer: And did that coincide with, oh kind of, no, I think the introdut... the charge was introduced in 2000 and probably 10 in Wales, something like that?
Participant: Was it that far back?
Interviewer: So that was after the recession wasn't it, 'cos you also mentioned the recession probably you stopped using Tesco's.
Participant: I'm trying to think when I stopped. It would have been around about the same time, I think not long after I would have stopped using Tesco's altogether, yeah, it would have coincided pretty much, I think there was a falling off of my shopping at Tesco's, probably starting from five years back.
Interviewer: And yeah, so yeah, just interesting because you also said that you kind of stopped using Tesco because the charge was introduced, yeah? So after the charge?
Participant: Yes, I mean had I not fallen out of liking with Tesco's, you know, I might still be going there, so it wasn't the charges for the bags which kind of put me off, it was Tesco's itself.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, yeah, and was there any other change in shopping behaviour that happened after the charge was introduced, do you remember?
Participant: To me?
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah, for yourself, yeah.
Participant: For myself. Well, I suppose around that sort of time I would have started doing the smaller shops as well.
Interviewer: You would have started to do, sorry, what?
Participant: The smaller shops as well.
Interviewer: Smaller shops.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how does that, why did that happen?
Participant: Why?
Interviewer: Was it again for some personal reason or is it connected to the charge somehow?
Participant: Not for the charge for bags, probably the fact that in Lidl and Aldi you do not have the range of things, so you would be doing perhaps a smaller shop there because of it and then doing smaller shops to get the other things that they don't have, you know. So I think it was more to do with that. But that also means that, you know, you don't have a huge need for something to transport things in.
Interviewer: Yeah, absolutely.
Participant: You know, if Lidl and Aldi had everything in their store then I wouldn't probably be able to manage with a large box, I would be needing more boxes which I then couldn't carry very easily, you know.
Interviewer: And do you think bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country or not? I mean Wales in this case, or you can think about the UK in general.
Participant: Probably in the UK people aren't used to being disciplined because the bag charge hasn't come in. In Wales I think there's, there needs to be a constant reminder to people perhaps, you know, so those, maybe in different ways, I don't know how you'd do it, but to the people who are still just using bags there needs to be something that gets through to the remainder of those people. You know, maybe if they had a stash of boxes quite close to where the till is and when people came through and they didn't bring their bag and they said 'oh, can I have bags', whether they should be offered the alternative.
Interviewer: One thing that, you know, is going to happen in England is that the 5p charge is going to be applied in a slightly [?? 40:23] way in the sense that, you know, the big supermarkets will charge 5p for a bag but there will be also small, I think medium to small outlets, food outlets and also corner shops, that will be exempt from it, do you find this right or not?
Participant: I think that is patchy in that, you know, people, either it's got to be one thing or the other, because otherwise people are gonna get caught out, you know, they've got to think 'oh, I haven't got a bag now because', you know. I think it needs to be across the board.
Interviewer: Sure, yeah, and what do you think about plastic bags for hot food and drinks, because again, in England, they will be exempt from it, is that the same kind of situation?
Participant: It's not really the same thing as kind of like food shop is it? People wouldn't necessarily think about bringing their own bags for takeaway, maybe that ought to come but I don't think the public have sort of got that far in their thinking. They tend to be thinner bags as well, I don't know whether that makes them environmentally a bit better, it would be neat if they were the type of bag which could biodegrade nicely but I don't know if that's a contradiction in terms with hot food, you know, the steam and stuff like that, whether you'd end up with sort of a soggy mess round your takeaway.
Interviewer: And how about clothes shops, do you think they should charge 5p as well or not, because that's another exemption in England.
Participant: I think corner shops should.
Interviewer: Sorry, clothes shops.
Participant: Oh sorry, clothes.
Interviewer: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Participant: Clothes shops... yes, I don't see why they shouldn't really, yeah if I buy clothes or shoes or something like that I don't expect to have a bag with it anymore, it does make you feel a little bit like a shoplifter though, you know, you've got the receipt in your bag but how do you tell somebody who's walking out with stuff because they've stolen it compared to somebody who's actually paid for it. It does make me feel a bit funny, even though I have paid for things, you know, I sort of think 'well, are people gonna know I have'.
Interviewer: Yeah absolutely, and also another exemption in England is going to be for paper and biodegradable bags, do you think this is the right situation or not, or should they pay as well?
Participant: Paper bags?
Interviewer: Paper and biodegradable.
Participant: I'm not so sure about that one. I think maybe those ought to be free because both are encouraging people to use those sort of products, so you know, if people can use those as opposed to the thick plastic bags and things then I think that should be encouraged, maybe that should be sort of subsidised a bit or whatever.
Interviewer: Yeah absolutely, and just the last thing, you know, about plastic bag charge, is what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Hopefully we have a wonderfully educated public who are so very organised and the environment will tidy up nicely. It probably won't happen quite like that, you know, there's always gonna be people who abuse things but, yeah, hopefully.
Interviewer: It will be better.
Participant: Oh definitely better, but I think that there are other things as well that need to be looked at environmentally.
Interviewer: What kind of things?
Participant: You know the drink can things where you get the, to hold the drink cans together, you have like a plastic, those things, I mean those can be quite dangerous to wildlife and things like that can't they, you know, like seagulls get their feet caught in things and cans of course, where seagulls and things are on rubbish tips and I mean I tend, when I, when I remember or when I'm being good, I tend to crush the can down before I put it in the waste so that no creature can get its paws, you know, trapped in between a lid and the actual tin and cut and things. Yeah, there's other environmental stuff that needs to be done really, and you know, on the subject of cans, I mean I know the Rugby Club there's somebody saying that the Rugby Club now they're being charged for their waste bags, they're being charged 16 pence for a waste and obviously they have loads of bottles and cans and stuff and they've now invested in a can crusher so you know, and of course if they had the space they could actually, you know, stack 'em up and trade 'em in and earn some money but I don't think they're gonna do that. But yeah, I mean maybe there ought to be some more places where you can actually crush cans down and things.
Interviewer: Yeah, definitely, and you mentioned packaging now, does it happen to you to look at packaging in supermarkets when you buy things, is this important to you at all or you would still go with the product if, you know, it was satisfying from a point of view?
Participant: I do, even though my eyesight is absolutely awful, I do try, and it's always small print on the back where they give all the information, I do try obviously to make sure there's nothing which is included which isn't vegetarian so I do look for that, and I mean sometimes I'll look at dates as well.
Interviewer: Yeah, but I mean packaging itself in terms of the plastic that is around the things, yeah.
Participant: Oh right, right.
Interviewer: Would you go for a product, you know, because, you know, how it's packed or not necessarily?
Participant: No not especially, I mean I'm more conscious of buying anything which is excessively packed anyway, I don't tend to buy things like ready meals and things so all that sort of packaging I don't have and it's hard to know how you get away with having a moist sort of ready meal in anything other than the plastic. So, no, I don't tend to look at that.
Interviewer: And just a couple of things about recycling, what do you, well basically yeah, do you recycle at home and what do you do with your waste usually?
Participant: Everything is recycled, like any, if there's anything wooden or paper or cardboard that all goes on the fire, OK, all the plastic is sorted into the hard plastic bag and the soft plastic bag and the cans will go in and the bottles will go in, there's a food waste bin that, you know, should the cat have some chicken with bones and stuff, that all goes into the little waste bin, and then anything else which is sort of vegetable matter goes into a bin and then down to the compost bin.
Interviewer: Yeah and what sort of recycling facilities do you currently have at home? What is provided by the Council?
Participant: They remove the waste like, as I say, chicken bones and stuff like that, they remove tins, bottles, plastics and they do remove card and paper but I don't need that, and for other people they provide services for nappies and stuff.
Interviewer: And do they provide you with free bin liners or, the Council I mean, or boxes, something like that, to put things into?
Participant: Yeah, but, a blue plastic box which goes out for like all the chicken type stuff and then there's bags for everything else, and those are free, apart from the grey bags which you have, you're rationed with if you like, you're given a supply for a year but after that you have to pay for them. But you know, there are areas where you see bags being collected together, put into the waste cart and then they're crunched up together, and you think 'why did people bother to separate it', you know, why are they telling people to separate the waste in these two bags and then they crush it up together?
Interviewer: Yeah. And on another sort of note, how often do you drive and does it happen for you to walk or cycle, you know, sometimes as opposed to driving?
Participant: Well I wish I could say 'yes' to that. I, for practical purposes I don't have a need particularly to walk places because, you know, as I say, I tend to do things when I'm out, I do it all in one go, exercise-wise I'm incredibly bad, I really ought to walk more and the dog agrees, but I don't tend to, yeah, it's work, when I come home, you know, I just want to flop, I'm usually shattered, often I'm up early and I'm back late and the last thing you want to do at that stage is take a walk, you know! And I tend to work weekends an awful lot as well so it's not like I've got a lot of sort of like spare time, I just hope that because I'm fairly active in work it kind of like that's my exercise, but I kind of think that I should be doing more.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to buy sort of eco-friendly products or fair-trade things or organic, sustainable, free-range?
Participant: No, I don't tend to do any of that.
Interviewer: What is the sort of, what are the main reasons?
Participant: I think sometimes it's a bit kind of pretentious in that it commands a higher price tag and I'm not sure of benefits, either to health or to the creatures, if you like, that are supposed to be benefiting, because for instance with battery hens they are allowed to live in much larger enclosures now than the free-range ones which only have to go out for 20 minutes a day to be called 'free-range', and all the rest of the time they're really cooped up, so you know, it doesn't really mean much. If I was thinking that these, I mean I haven't, obviously some places they are totally free-range, but how do you know which you're buying from most of the time? You know, if I thought there were chickens running around quite happily as they would in their natural environment then, yeah, I might consider that but I mean I just can't tell and I don't want to be supporting people who aren't actually making their lives better anyway.
Interviewer: Yeah sure. What does 'environmentally-friendly behaviour' mean to you in general, if you could just give a couple of examples and, you know, thoughts.
Participant: I think making sure that you don't spread litter around when you're out and about, that you kind of look after all the beauty spots that are around you, like I mean I don't do it, but I mean there are people who go out and they sort of clear waterways and all sorts of things in their own time, and not using things that are gonna harm the environment, you know, I'm thinking also, not just the bag issue, but chemicals and things like that, I tend to make up a lot of things at home that, sort of aromatherapy type things that I make up for the kitchen or for the bathroom, and they're natural products as opposed to harmful sort of things with ammonia and all this kind of stuff in. Other than that, I do recycle, I put it down in my little diary, I do recycle things like if I have a bag of oranges with the net, I saw it on SuperScrimpers one time, that you actually, you know, use those and you put a ball of one inside another and you tie it and then you, you just keep adding and it makes really nice sort of like washing-up sponges.
Interviewer: Oh I see, yeah, that's interesting.
Participant: Yeah, so I, you know, I do a lot of craft things when I do have some time and so I kind of look at everything that comes into the house in a slightly different way to other people might, and I'm always thinking 'what can I use that for', you know.
Interviewer: And what kind of things do you reuse?
Participant: Well like the scrungy things but also the if I see a piece of furniture for instance and I think 'well, that could be really nice if you just did this or that with it', you know, and also in the, my craft thing, I'm always looking out for odd bits of, like on gift, tags that you get on clothing, I save all those and I use them in a different way in my crafting, any little bits of ribbon that you get on tags sometimes or on clothing, I, you know, keep all those bits. All sorts of sparkly bits or pretty bits and things like that, I just, I just keep, keep aside. And things like buttons as well, I mean lots of people just chuck clothes out, sometimes I think 'well, could I make anything out of that material' or I would be cutting off the buttons and I save all the buttons, partly for crafting but sometimes, you know, I mean buttons are quite expensive and they're just wasted all the time, so yeah, if I see pretty buttons on something I just keep 'em. So all sorts of bits and pieces I recycle. Also, all sorts of plastic cartons, when I'm painting and stuff I use those as paint trays, so yeah.
Interviewer: And how concerned at all are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Pretty concerned I'd say.
Interviewer: Yeah, what in particular?
Participant: I think, controversial though it may sound, I'm pretty concerned about the number of people because it's people that ruin their own environment and the more people there are the more damage is being done all the time.
Interviewer: Sure yeah. And would you say that environment is an important part of your identity or not, or an important part of your life?
Participant: I think it, I think it is to a fair extent in that I like space, I like countryside, I like it to look natural, if I was brought up in a city maybe I would have a different viewpoint altogether, I don't know, but yes, because I've always appreciated countryside and had the good fortune usually to live in it, that I think I do appreciate it and I want it kept nice.
Interviewer: And compared to other issues in the modern society, how important the environment is, for example compared to, you know, social questions, economic, health?
Participant: It's a mighty big one isn't it, I mean they're different issues, it's hard to compare one thing with another really, I'm certainly concerned about the Health Service in the country and things like immigration like everybody else at the moment, so it's one of the important issues I would say.
Interviewer: Would it be on the same sort of level of importance or not quite?
Participant: It's hard, it's hard to, for, to equate that, I mean some things it might be more important and some things less and some things just as, you know.
Interviewer: You mean some aspects of these areas is it, is that what you mean, that some aspects of environment are more important than others and health and social? Is that what you mean or not, sorry!
Participant: I mean if you compare the environmental issue with something like the threat from IS then I guess it's down a notch, you know, 'cos it's not, not quite so, so devastating and could be very sudden, you know, a strike, so it's a different sort of timescale and things like that if you like. If you take away the threat from IS, then yes, obviously looking after our own environment is very important.
Interviewer: Do you mean by the timescales that this kind of threat would be more immediate than environmental?
Participant: It could be very immediate if things suddenly really sort of take off in some way, you know, there's another big strike like the Twin Towers or something like that that happens in Britain, you know, the environmental issue would have to take a bit of a backseat. In terms of the Health Service, I would say that they're almost, almost the same because the environment affects people's health so they're sort of intertwined, you know, if people are looking after their health and the environment more then perhaps the National Health Service wouldn't have such demand on it. I'm thinking of people who are becoming very obese and things like that, and.
Interviewer: Yeah OK. Thank you very much.
Participant: It's difficult to quantify that, you know, one thing against another really.
Interviewer: Of course, yeah, yeah, yeah, but still, you know, it would be, it's just kind of interesting to discuss about.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And maybe just the last question because I know we are running out of time, but very, very last one is, you know, how do you feel in terms of, do you think, you know, as a person who lives in the UK, as a citizen, do you feel that you have enough knowledge, skills and support to be more environmentally, so to be, sorry, to be able to, you know, protect and sustain the environment or is there anything that, you know, it can be improved in that respect? Just you as compared to, not as compared to anyone else, but you just, you know, living in, as part of the society.
Participant: I do quite a lot of recycling and stuff like that. One of the things you said about do I read packaging, if I can just backtrack briefly on that, the other thing I would be looking for is what food has in it, because I think we're fed an awful lot of chemicals, preservatives and all that kind of stuff, so that is of interest as well, I forgot to mention that. OK, in terms of support, I don't know what other support I could have really.
Interviewer: So you think you yourself have, you know, you have what you need right now to do things for the environment, yeah.
Participant: I think the only other issue is what you do with very big things.
Interviewer: Sure.
Participant: And I know the Council charge quite a lot for moving those now, and I know that the tips are free, I think in most areas, it's often a transporting issue that's the problem, and the other bit I think which needs to really be clamped down on is if, I know people do their best, but for instance, I was down at the, at the Rugby Club only this morning and in the car park somebody had dumped a smashed up caravan, yeah, and when I was up near Abergavenny there was a beautiful spot and I came round a bend and I saw a lorry parked on the bend and I thought 'well that's a strange place to park' and when it moved off, I could see people coming over this sort of like fence bit and they whipped into the lorry and when they moved off I could see they'd dumped a great big freezer, you know, I mean it's just totally unnecessary, you know, down the road there is a Council tip.
Interviewer: Yeah absolutely, yeah, there are things like this! Yeah, thank you very much Glinna, I do have to stop now because my colleague is going to take over the phone in a few minutes.
Participant: Right, no worries.
Interviewer: Can I just ask you a couple of demographic questions and obviously, you know, next time in November there will be Part 2 so we can discuss a little bit more as well.
Participant: Sure.
Interviewer: I really appreciated the interview, it was really, really interesting.