Interviewer: So could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: Yeah it was fine, the only problem I had was that, I think it was the last but one day, no link was sent to me, so I had to send a message to get a link but then I had a message back not long after I emailed anyway.
Interviewer: OK. Was it easy?
Participant: Yeah it was easy.
Interviewer: And was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: Anything what, sorry?
Interviewer: Tedious to write down.
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: OK. Would you please describe your typical food shopping trip.
Participant: Typical food shopping is it's never planned for a specific day, when I need food I'll just go and do a food shop, I never do like a shopping list or anything, I just basically pick what I see off the shelf.
Interviewer: And how often do you think you go food shopping?
Participant: Probably once a week, once, yeah, between a week and a week and a half.
Interviewer: And what's your, what stores do you normally go to, to buy your food?
Participant: When I go every week to a week and a half that's for my main shop, I sort of do like sort of top-ups in between as well, so my main shop would be Asda and then I'll do top-ups in Morrison's and the Co-op.
Interviewer: OK, is there any particular reason why you shop at these shops?
Participant: Asda I find is cheaper than the rest, so that's where I do my main shopping, and then my top-ups then, Co-op is only up the road from my house and Morrison's I always pass on my way home from work.
Interviewer: And what is important to you when choosing food and what is less important?
Participant: Most important is value for money and obviously quality of food, and then less, oh I don't know really, I suppose everything's important really when you're shopping. I suppose distance I suppose 'cos I don't even know, I go mainly to Asda, it is a good sort of six, seven miles away from my house, but I go there because of, I like the quality of their fresh food and it is cheaper than anywhere else.
Interviewer: OK, and how do you normally travel to the shops that you go to, so for your main shop and your top-ups.
Participant: By car.
Interviewer: And why do you drive your car?
Participant: Because distance really, they're not exactly on my doorstep and I've got such a busy lifestyle that I haven't got time to go walking to the shop anyway.
Interviewer: And do you go food shopping on your own or with someone?
Participant: Either on my own or with my daughter.
Interviewer: And how much of your food goes to waste every week?
Participant: I get wastage but my parents have got a farm and they've got pigs so any sort of food waste goes to them anyway so it doesn't really get wasted.
Interviewer: Could you tell me five words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear 'supermarket plastic bag'?
Participant: Costs money, quality has gone absolutely atrocious, they've gone smaller, not good value for money and, oh God! I don't really get them, don't really get them if I don't have to.
Interviewer: And do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: No, they've always been there.
Interviewer: OK, so you can't really remember like.
Participant: No, not really, not really since [?? 06:11] no, would have thought of that.
Interviewer: And what types of bags or containers do you normally take, or do you normally use, sorry, to pack your shopping?
Participant: I normally buy the bag for life, the plasticky ones, the thicker plastic ones.
Interviewer: OK, and I mean is that something you do automatically without thinking?
Participant: Yeah 'cos I mean in Asda it's only, for one of the really thin ones it's 5 pence and for the bag for life it's 6 pence, so it's worth paying just a penny extra to get something that's a lot hardier.
Interviewer: And what about for your top-up shops?
Participant: If I'm only getting like sort of a couple of things then I'll just get the cheapy 5 pence ones 'cos in Morrison's and the Co-op I think they're 10 or 12 pence, so I'll just like a normal 5 pence bag then if I'm only getting a few things.
Interviewer: And why do you think bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well, it's meant to be once they've broken you can go back and exchange it for a new one, not that I ever do anyway though.
Interviewer: Do you think that the name sort, that the bag sort of matches the name?
Participant: No not really because they don't last for life!
Interviewer: And why do you buy bags for life rather than like, oh you said actually, there was only 1p difference.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why you use bags for life and the plasticky ones rather than bringing like your own bag, like a rucksack or something?
Participant: I, well I use the bag for life as a recycling bin at my sink as well, I put my, I put my like sort of black bag rubbish into that one and then put it into the black bag, 'cos it's obviously more hardy for waste in the house.
Interviewer: And is there anything that you don't think is sort of like not very good about the bags for life?
Participant: They've gone a lot smaller than they used to be, before they used to be a lot bigger and they just seem to have gone like less deep and less, they're quite narrow inside.
Interviewer: OK, so where do you store your bags that you take with you when you go food shopping?
Participant: I have got a few that I keep in the car in the boot, so sometimes when I go shopping I will take some in with me rather than buying them, but if I'm running low in the house that I use for waste I'll just buy more.
Interviewer: And in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Oh yeah, I mean it's very important 'cos obviously with your shopping and stuff you need to pack it away to carry it to the car.
Interviewer: So what if plastic bags completely disappeared from stores, how do you think you would find that?
Participant: I'd probably just get the jute type bags and the bigger shopping bags, so I mean it wouldn't be a disaster if they discontinued them but I'd need to find out other alternatives then.
Interviewer: So do you think you'd sort of mind or not really?
Participant: No not really.
Interviewer: So you mentioned using bags for life sort of as bin liners.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you ever use them for anything else?
Participant: I use them to protect my daughter's like sort of gym kit and to take to the school, or like if I'm taking like sort of if I'm staying at my parents or something then I'll put some like sort of bits and pieces in there to carry things up there.
Interviewer: And how many plastic bags roughly do you currently have at home do you think?
Participant: I've probably got about six or seven.
Interviewer: So you know what the plastic bag charge is then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Seeing as you're in Wales, do you remember in what context you heard about it for the first time?
Participant: I think it was like the media, like either the TV or Facebook, yeah it was probably one of those I would have thought, and like sort of obviously everyone talking about it as well.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the charge?
Participant: Considering the quality has gone down and the bags since we've been charged I think that's ridiculous 'cos I mean obviously when we weren't being charged for them they were a lot better quality so how come they've gone so bad now that we're paying for them? Plus, England don't pay for them so why should we have to pay for them?
Interviewer: And when you say the quality has gone down do you mean, so you mentioned earlier the bags for life have gotten smaller.
Participant: Plus the thickness as well, I mean the 5 pence ones they are so paper-thin and the amount of bags that I've had to sort of, I've packed a few things in and they've broken and I've had to ask for another one, they've gone so paper-thin it's ridiculous.
Interviewer: OK, so did you find the introduction of the plastic bag charge surprising?
Participant: Yeah it was because obviously all of a sudden it sort of just came about.
Interviewer: And what's good about the charge versus what's not very good about it? So obviously I guess the quality of the bags is not a, is a bad thing about it, yeah.
Participant: I suppose with the charge it makes people, when they were free people were just putting one or two things in each bag so it makes them, makes people use them so there's not so much waste of the bags. I suppose there's not so much litter then is there?
Interviewer: And do you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Yes I did, I had heard that.
Interviewer: OK, do you know when and how you did hear about it?
Participant: I think it was from friends.
Interviewer: Was that sort of quite recent or a while back?
Participant: Yeah, quite recently 'cos I've got quite a few friends in England, it was probably one of those that told me.
Interviewer: And what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge then?
Participant: Probably to use towards recycling or something, I'm probably wrong but I'm just assuming it's to use like how to get rid of them.
Interviewer: OK. So do you think that the charge sort of does fulfil that in then?
Participant: No not really, I think we pay enough in taxes and like all what we have to pay out and everything, so I don't think that having to pay for plastic bags as well is, I mean I know it doesn't cost the earth or anything to get some bags but I just don't see the point in it really.
Interviewer: So maybe they should do it in a different way other than charging people.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK. So do you think the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affected you?
Participant: No it hasn't really affected me.
Interviewer: What about in terms of shopping bag use?
Participant: Yeah, I'd probably say that I use less bags. I mean before I did use the 5 pence bags so obviously they were better quality when we weren't paying them, I never really bought the bags for life, I'd only sort of buy the bags for life for my frozen food, so it's affected me in terms of I'm not using as many bags as I used to.
Interviewer: And do you think it's changed your shopping behaviour at all?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And do you think you've become a more environmentally-friendly person since the charge came in?
Participant: Not because of the bags, no, I've become more environmentally-friendly in general with the introduction of the recycling system but not because of the bags.
Interviewer: And did you notice any changes after the sort of the charge came in, in your local area or, and also in your country?
Participant: No not really, not that I can think of.
Interviewer: OK. And do you think the bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: Well we're not encouraged to reuse them. I don't know about in schools and stuff they do encourage the children to recycle with the bags and stuff and to use them again for various things, but it's not sort of pushed upon us or anything.
Interviewer: OK, so do you think that anything needs to be changed about that or not really?
Participant: Not really 'cos I think people will just do what they want anyway whether they're told to do it or not.
Interviewer: OK, so when the 5p charge comes into effect in England they'll be some types of bag and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, do you think that that's fair?
Participant: Yeah 'cos I mean when you go to, let's say if you're going to the chip shop for instance or where you're getting like hot food then obviously you need to have a bag, like I know that the Chinese shops they don't charge 5 pence for the bags, whether they've put the money, like they've upped the price of the food I don't know, but they don't charge you 5 pence for a bag, which you need a bag if you're handling hot food otherwise you're gonna burn yourself, so I think that they should be free. But in a supermarket when you're buying other things, I mean you can carry them to the car, you don't need to have a bag so it's under your discretion whether you want to have a bag in a supermarket, but when it comes to sort of takeaways with hot food then I think that they should be free there.
Interviewer: OK.
Participant: Or if you're spending, I mean if you're spending a lot of money, like say in a clothes shop or something, then I know it's only 5 pence but you're spending enough as it is, why should you have to pay for a bag as well type of thing.
Interviewer: Out of interest, how much money do you think you should spend before, in order for the bag to then come free in a clothes shop?
Participant: I think if you spend £50 or more then.
Interviewer: So quite a lot then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges such as the congestion charge in London?
Participant: I don't really know much about that to be honest with you, only sort of what my kind of parents go to London a lot, if there's any sort of bits that I've picked up from their conversation so I don't really know enough to comment on it.
Interviewer: It's basically just a charge for driving in busy areas.
Participant: Right.
Interviewer: So.
Participant: The thing is, how can you avoid that though if, say, if you're going home then how are you to sort of avoid the congestion when that's your route home?
Interviewer: So are you saying that the charges are different because you can't avoid the congestion charge but you can avoid the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: If they were going to sort of bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, how would you feel about that?
Participant: Well, plastic bottles, how do I, there's no other way of having your, like it's a liquid form isn't it, where there's no other way of having your liquids so it would have to come in a plastic or jar bottle. With veg, I buy all fresh anyway, I don't buy them in bags, I mean obviously I use the little bags that are on the side for loose veg but I mean you can avoid like sort of using those, but you can't really avoid it with any liquids.
Interviewer: So do you think you'd be in favour of maybe the charge on the vegetables but not with the plastic bottles?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK. So what do you think will happen in ten years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: It'll probably go up.
Interviewer: In price?
Participant: Yeah, as everything does. They can't get any worse quality than what they are at the moment because they're really bad.
Interviewer: So basically just more expensive.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Anything else?
Participant: No not really.
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: Say that again sorry.
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: Yeah I use water at home.
Interviewer: Do you save it, sorry?
Participant: I save it, yeah, yeah, like when I'm brushing my teeth and stuff.
Interviewer: Do you have any other examples of how you save water?
Participant: I've got like a kettle that only boils one cup at a time rather than the whole kettle. I use like sort of, like when I'm doing sort of a Sunday roast and stuff I'll use like the veg water instead of using, like boiling the kettle to do the gravy and stuff. I know it sounds disgusting but my daughter will just, if we're having a bath or whatever, she'll like sort of jump in the bath and then I'll jump in the bath after her or vice versa rather than doing two baths.
Interviewer: And why do you save water at home?
Participant: I don't know, it's just something that I've always done sort of automatically really, 'cos I mean I'm not on a meter or anything so it's not to save money or anything like that.
Interviewer: It's just a habit.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what about energy, do you save energy at home?
Participant: Yeah, I will, basically to sort of, to save money I like to turn switches off, I'll take plugs out, I won't like sort of leave lights on all over the house.
Interviewer: And is that habit as well or do you have to plan to do that?
Participant: No, just habit now. First of all it was sort of mentally to save money but it's just something that I automatically do now.
Interviewer: And do you reuse things at home?
Participant: Yeah, like sort of I'll use containers, like say Chinese containers I'll wash them and reuse them for like sort of lunchboxes, and jars and things and obviously the food that we don't eat goes up to the animals at the farm.
Interviewer: And why do you reuse things at home?
Participant: Basically because of, I mean like the containers from the Chinese for instance, they're good enough to use as sandwich boxes or to sort of freeze food in them, rather than go out and buy one.
Interviewer: And is that a habit as well of saving those?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So when you're sort of doing your food shop do you ever pay attention to the packaging that's on the products?
Participant: No not really.
Interviewer: So do you think packaging's not very important?
Participant: I do try to go for like plastic over jars because the jars are sort of harder to recycle, whereas any plastic packaging can just be washed and go straight into the blue bin, whereas with a jar I've got to take it to the bottle bank which is seven miles away, so I've got bottles, I've got like sort of jars hanging around the kitchen until I go, next go into town.
Interviewer: OK, so you go for plastic just so it's easier to recycle then.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So what other kind of things do you recycle at home?
Participant: Obviously I recycle the food, I take the jars to the bottle bank, everything just really goes into either the blue bag, which is where your cardboard, your card, your plastic, your paper, all that goes into the same one, even aerosol cans can go into that bag, and then everything else that can't be recycled just goes into the black bag.
Interviewer: And why do you recycle?
Participant: Mainly because we get fined if we don't.
Interviewer: Oh!
Participant: If we put bags out, like say I put blue bags out that have the wrong things in them then we can be fined for that and they'll leave the bags behind and they won't take them off.
Interviewer: Right, so.
Participant: I haven't heard of anyone being fined but it is a known thing that you can get fined if you put the wrong things in the bag.
Interviewer: Yeah OK, is that a habit then, recycling?
Participant: Yeah, since it's come in a few years ago, yeah.
Interviewer: And how often do you drive?
Participant: Every day.
Interviewer: Do you drive in a fuel-efficient way?
Participant: Yeah, I would sort of change my gears and stuff.
Interviewer: Why do you drive in a fuel-efficient way?
Participant: To save money really!
Interviewer: And again, is that habit?
Participant: Yeah!
Interviewer: And do you walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: I do buy the, I can't remember what it is now, I can visualise it and the packaging it's got 'eco-friendly'. My car is eco-friendly as well 'cos the engine is a little engine.
Interviewer: OK, cool.
Participant: I think it's something like, you know, like the toilet paper and stuff, I'm sure I've seen like 'eco-friendly' on that. I can't think off the top of my head though.
Interviewer: Do you know sort of how often you buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: To be honest with you I don't like specifically go for the eco-friendly, it's only if it's on anything that I sort of like the look of.
Interviewer: Anything you like the look of?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: OK.
Participant: Like if something said that it had better cleaning properties than another one, it might be eco-friendly but it's because of other reasons, it's not because that it's eco-friendly.
Interviewer: OK, I see what you mean. Do you buy organic food?
Participant: Yeah I do sometimes.
Interviewer: How often do you think?
Participant: Probably every time I go shopping because [?? 29:08] all the carrots I think they look nicer than the other ones.
Interviewer: So 'look nicer' as in you think they'll taste nicer.
Participant: Yeah, they look a lot fresh, a lot more fresh and I know that if sort of there's no nasty substances put into them.
Interviewer: And do you ever busy sustainable food, so foods that go towards animal welfare or forests and fisheries?
Participant: Yeah I think some of the fruit and veg and stuff in Asda says that it goes to like sort of the various places, I can't think exactly what kind of food that it is, I think it’s mainly the fruit and veg sections.
Interviewer: So do you sort of buy that because you're buying it anyway and it's kind of like coincidence that it's.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So do you support environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: I do through the school with my daughter, like they come home with letters and they give like sort of money to various organisations, like we do the shoe box for children at Christmas time and she's just done one for, is it Nesta in Africa, they've just gone to Church yesterday, something to do some recycle and I've given money for that, for Nesta in Africa. So there's always like different like sort of third world like sort of organisations that I'm giving money to throughout the school.
Interviewer: And that's more for sort of the children rather than like environmental causes.
Participant: Yeah, well they do, it's like an eco-week in school where they do something like sort of everyday of the week and they'll sort of take money in then for different things which obviously go to like eco-friendly things.
Interviewer: So it's a bit of both.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: So all of these behaviours we've just talked about, have you noticed anything about them during the diary period?
Participant: No not really.
Interviewer: What does 'environmentally-friendly behaviour' mean to you?
Participant: Basically behaving in a way that's helping the environment and that isn't harming the environment.
Interviewer: Do you have any examples?
Participant: I think it's natural really, like obviously using cars and things is harming the environment so by going, walking or cycling is being environmentally-friendly, organic products like sort of not using sort of various pesticides and chemicals to grow your fruit and veg, any kind of chemicals really.
Interviewer: So how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: Yeah I mean obviously there is concern there because of having a daughter is wondering what kind of sort of life that they're gonna grow up into and what kind of world it's going to be like, but we don't sort of, because we don't get to know, I mean obviously there is information there of what certain things are doing to the environment but because it's not in your face every day sometimes you don't think about it when you're doing things, like for instance, using the car, I don't think to myself, 'oh I'm ruining the atmosphere by putting all these things into the air' because it's something that I've got to do every day anyway 'cos otherwise I can't get to work, unless I wanted to walk sort of seventeen miles! So it's not something that I'm conscious about but it is in the back of my mind thinking what's it gonna be like in sort of twenty years’ time [?? 34:01] thing.
Interviewer: And are there any specific issues that you're, specific environmental issues that you're concerned about or is it just sort of a general concern?
Participant: Yeah, general really.
Interviewer: So what does the environment mean to you then?
Participant: Yeah I mean it does mean quite a lot because I mean I've got horses so I'm constantly in the countryside and the constant sort of people throwing litter around country lanes and obviously it's going into the fields and obviously affecting animals in the fields, I can tell by obviously my parents have got a farm and all these sort of chemicals and stuff in the air that is getting more and more every year that you can tell the difference in the quality of the grass and everything. So I mean, yeah, that does concern me as well because obviously you can see over the years how it's sort of affecting the environment.
Interviewer: Is the environment an important part of your identity and your life then?
Participant: Yeah I'd say so 'cos I'm more of a country girl rather than a townie and obviously as somebody who's in the countryside a lot, you know, it's not nice seeing the countryside being ruined by litter and by people that come in and just don't respect it type of thing.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I am, I'm quite fussy when it comes to waste, I mean I can't stand people throwing litter on the floor and stuff 'cos I think you either put it in the bin or take it with you and put it in the bin at home, you know, there's no need to do that. It's the same like sometimes when you go for food at a restaurant and people have been outside smoking and there's all like sort of fag butts on the floor when there's like a litterbin like close by, I just think it's lazy and it's just making the place look untidy and horrible.
Interviewer: So compared to issues in modern society, so social issues, economic issues and health issues, how important, if at all, are the environmental issues to you?
Participant: In regards with like health and stuff?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Well obviously the more chemicals that go on into the air affects people's breathing and stuff so it's gonna affect illnesses.
Interviewer: And the economy and society?
Participant: And the what sorry?
Interviewer: Economy and social issues as well, do you think environmental issues are kind of as important or less important or more important?
Participant: Well the environmental side it is important, 'cos obviously it's the world that we're living in.
Interviewer: So if you sort of had to rank the importance of the different issues, how do you think you'd do that?
Participant: Between what then, sorry? Environment.
Interviewer: Yeah, environment, the economy, health and social issues.
Participant: Well I'd probably say the environment first because it's that that affects health and health to be second, the economy.
Interviewer: And then just sort of general society.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues, yeah.
Participant: No, not really, I mean I only pick up bits from what interest me really, and if I see something that comes up in the News or the papers that look boring and doesn't have any relevance to me then I won't sort of look into it.
Interviewer: Do you think that you'd like to improve that or not?
Participant: Only if it affected me really.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally-friendly or not?
Participant: Yeah, I mean if you wanted to be more environmentally-friendly then you can just go onto the internet and just search things.
Interviewer: So do you think you gain enough support from the Government and from any environmental organisations to be environmentally-friendly?
Participant: No not really 'cos when it comes to things like, they used to save the blue bags where you recycle all the cardboard and paper and stuff, when you're coming to the end of your roll then you just put a sticker on the bag and then they would, the bin men would basically leave some more on your doorstep, but now you can't do that, you've either got to go and get them yourself or you've got to phone them up and order them, well, I mean the Government moan then why people are putting things in the wrong bags, but people sometimes haven't got time to sit and wait on the phone for God knows how long while you're put on hold listening to music to order more bags, some people, especially elderly people, haven't got internet access to order any more so they're not really helping us to recycle properly. And it's the same with black bags, we can't get black bags free of service anymore, we have to pay for them, so that's putting people off from recycling properly as well, so no, I don't think we do get enough encouragement from the Government.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Which of your environmental behaviours are you particularly happy with?
Participant: Well, that I don't litter the place and I recycle properly.
Interviewer: And which of your behaviours in this area are you not so happy with?
Participant: Probably the amount that I use my car, that is unavoidable really.
Interviewer: And would you like to change anything in your environmental behaviours or not?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I, I've already said that I want to start sort of walking to school with my daughter, both obviously to save using the car and to get fitter as well, but it just never seems to come about!
Interviewer: What are the main problems in your neighbourhood, if any?
Participant: Main problems...
Interviewer: So things like vandalism, anti-social behaviour, litter.
Participant: In my area in particular is quite a nice area, it doesn't really have that much, but I mean in surrounding areas you've got sort of boy racers racing up and down the roads, you have got the litter about the place, cigarette butts on the floor, and then there are parks in town, I mean you see it all the time on Facebook, with needles being left in parks from drug users, which is like so dangerous when you've got your children playing in these parks, and then you've got like sort of the Council estates then that have got rubbish all their gardens and stuff and, you know, and they leave all their dogs roaming the streets and stuff which are ripping the bags apart, and then obviously the bin men won't take them then, and they just don't seem to care, they just leave it on their gardens and stuff.
Interviewer: OK, but your particular neighbourhood there aren't these kind of problems.
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So everything we've just sort of talked about during the interview, is there anything you want to add or emphasise?
Participant: Not that I can think of.