Interviewer: What do you think about the diary?
Participant: …enjoyed it.
Interviewer: What was easy for you and what like…
Participant: I think just because you just clicked on the wee thing, it was quite good the way that it just kind of, all the questions were there for you. And reminder, I liked the way I got a reminder, sometimes I didn’t do it till later on right enough when I got home, but no, it was fine, it was easy.
Interviewer: Great, and was there anything that you found a bit difficult to write down at all?
Participant: No, no, nothing at all, no, nothing.
Interviewer: Did anything surprise you at all about it?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: Anything that you would like you know, from your own words to add to it, or?
Participant: No, no, it was fine.
Interviewer: Okay, and then you know, the second things that we’re going to talk, so that’s like the interview, what it’s going to be about you know, some of the questions that we touched upon in the diary, so a little bit you know, because obviously people cannot write down every single thing so, this is why you know, we wanted to speak with everybody.
Participant: No, that’s fine, that’s fine.
Interviewer: So basically to clarify their points of view you know, see how you know, what people think and so on, and again you know, because everyone is different and also we you know, as researchers we have a neutral point of view on these things so for this reason there are no good or bad answers, but yeah, we would like to ask you you know, to think about some of these questions and tell us what you think and you know, to have basically your honest point of view, so just be open you know, towards you know, there’s no issue at all you know?  So the first thing I wanted to ask you about is to tell us about your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: Yeah, well I didn’t do as much shopping because I was in the hospital before, just before the diary, so my mum was kind of making some of my food and that, but a typical shopping trip would probably be maybe going to Aldi or Costco, that’s the kind of two I use most, and occasionally I might nip into the corner shops and that but I’ve tried to stop doing that because you just spend too much money, I try to just buy more in advance.
Interviewer: So do you tend to make a big food shopping trip?
Participant: Yeah, well I don’t, I’ve got my grandchildren, my children are up now so I don’t use as much as what I used to years ago, but yeah, I try to buy quite a lot, like my butcher meat and stuff like that in bulk, and I’m using Aldi a lot more now in the last few months, I’m really impressed with it.
Interviewer: And what do you like about it?
Participant: It’s just the quality is really good, not just the fact it’s lower prices, the quality is really, I’ve never been disappointed with anything that I’ve bought, so it’s been good.  And you don’t spend so much, if I go to Asda or Tesco or Morrisons or Sainsbury’s I end up buying things that I probably didn’t need, if I go to Aldi I just buy my shopping, I’m not tempted by offers and stuff.
Interviewer: And how often do you go to Aldi, how many times a week or a month?
Participant: Maybe a couple of times a month.
Interviewer: So you do a big shop there basically?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And do you go…
Participant: I used to shop daily, we used to have a Tesco where I lived and it shut last November and I used to go in every night after work, and see when I think of the amount of food I wasted and how much money I wasted was ridiculous, so I don’t do that now.
Interviewer: And you also mentioned that sometimes you get, you need to go and buy like bits and bobs here and there, yeah?
Participant: Yeah, sometimes if I need milk or if I’ve ran out of something I go to, three’s a Costcutters, it’s quite local, or just one of the local shops or Spars, I try again and keep away from Asda and Tesco because I spend too much.
Interviewer: So you try to avoid Tesco in general?
Participant: Yeah, yeah and Asda.
Interviewer: And is Spar and Costcutter cheaper than Tesco?
Participant: Well they’re the same price for milk, you get your milk for £1, some of the things are maybe a wee bit more expensive but when I think that’s all I’ll buy anyway I’m still cheaper than going to Asda and ended up buying more cakes and stuff that I see, so I’m still cheaper going to the smaller shop.
Interviewer: Because there is less choice there?
Participant: Aye, there’s less choice, I just go and buy what I’m going to buy, I don’t look about, I just get what I need.
Interviewer: Okay, and how do you plan your food shopping?
Participant: I don’t do a list, I do maybe if I’m having a party or that but sometimes I lose it, I just kind of go down every aisle, I’ve been shopping for that many years now I’ve kind of got it down to a T, but if I go to Aldi I just go up and down all the aisles except the clothes and that, I can’t be bothered with that, but all the food aisles I just go up and down.
Interviewer: Do you take a list with you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: How do you usually travel to the store?
Participant: I drive.
Interviewer: Okay, and is it the same for, sorry, is that the same for the main shop you know, for the big shop?
Participant: Yeah, I always have my car, yeah.
Interviewer: And you know the local shops that you go to?
Participant: Yeah, I use, I drive as well, I just stop on my way back, I never walk.
Interviewer: Okay, and why do prefer using car for…
Participant: Just laziness probably, laziness and it’s on my way home.
Interviewer: And is it a shot distance you know, the local shops, are they on the doorstep, or?
Participant: Maybe about, I would say maybe a 10 minute walk, it’s not that nice a walk.
Interviewer: And when you choose food, what is important to you and what is less…
Participant: The quality, the quality’s the most important.
Interviewer: And how do you define the quality?
Participant: I think just by looking and just looking, like at the meat I just look at the meat that’s offered to you, obviously it looks fresh and stuff, I don’t buy the cheapest range, I kind of maybe go for the better, if there’s a choice, like if I’m going to buy mince I might buy the Aberdeen Angus steak mince I wouldn’t just buy cheap mince, so although I go to Aldi I still like the kind of better, I don’t buy the cheaper, if that makes sense?
Interviewer: So you tend to choose the better quality in Aldi?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, if there’s a choice of the better quality I usually go for that.
Interviewer: Of course, yeah, and I forgot to ask, before you started using Aldi what was your main supermarket?
Participant: Tesco.
Interviewer: Tesco yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And how did you come across Aldi and why did you decide to swap?
Participant: Well my sister, well I’ve used it maybe on and off a few times throughout the years but my sister started going and probably with all the advertising I’ve seen on TV about it being cheaper and stuff, and I started off just going for a few things and trying things out and like now as I say we not been disappointed with anything.
Interviewer: Of course, yeah, and when you go food shopping do you usually go with someone or do you go on your own?
Participant: Mostly on my own, sometimes my partner goes but mostly on my own, but it doesn’t make any difference, I choose anyway, he usually looks at all the tools and stuff like that.
Interviewer: And when you go with your partner how do you coordinate who buys…
Participant: I just do it, he goes and looks at other things, I just go and get the shopping, he usually looks at you know, all the clothing and offers and stuff like that that they have so he doesn’t have much input into the shopping.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, and does it happen to you that sometimes you buy things that you are not able to use you know, food things that you are not able to use?
Participant: I’m not so bad, I used to do that a lot but occasionally but not so much now, I usually look at the dates and I tend to take stuff from the back of the shelf as well, so, and because I’ve got grandkids and that as well if I think I’m not going to use stuff I just give them to my son and he takes them home, so I don’t really have much waste these days.
Interviewer: I see, yeah, so basically there is, you could say that there is not much food waste in your home?
Participant: No, no.
Interviewer: And how do you look after not wasting things, how do you manage not to waste?
Participant: I just check the dates and if I’m not going to use it I’d give it away, and I try and not buy too many fresh stuff, like I don’t buy that much chilled, I might buy like a pizza and maybe, I can’t even think, maybe chicken portions and stuff, but usually if I’m buying, I buy quite a lot of my meat out of Costco and freeze it so I don’t have that much, I usually buy what I need, I’m quite good at not having food waste.
Interviewer: And is there anything else that you would like to add to the food shopping before we move on to the next…
Participant: No, no, that’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay, great, yeah, the next thing I’m going to ask you is slightly unusual, could you tell me you know, maybe like 5 words or expressions that come up to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Right, expensive, not fit for purpose, too thin, ridiculous, and another one was it, I can’t think of another one, just rubbish, just rubbish, they’re rubbish quality.  See from they started charging I don’t mind, if I’ve got to pay that’s fine, sometimes I take my bags but I usually forget, but I don’t mind paying 6p or 10p for a decent quality but see the amount of shops now that they’re that thin you can hardly put a pint of milk and a loaf in it, it really infuriates me, and I spend quite a lot of time in London and obviously the bags are still free there, and they’re better quality, so it just totally annoys me.
Interviewer: Oh God, yeah, and do you remember that point in your life when you first came across the supermarket plastic bags?
Participant: Oh, when I was wee, they’ve been there forever haven’t they, when I was small, I think they charged for them back then actually years and years ago, I think they did charge for bags, but maybe I’m wrong, because I’m 48 but yeah, I can always remember getting a carrier bag, so say I don’t know, from I was maybe 10 or something.
Interviewer: And di your parents used to get those bags in shops or did they…
Participant: Yeah, my mum always got them but my gran always took her own bags.
Interviewer: What types of bags you know, containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: I usually just, if I buy, if I remember to take bags with me I’ve got an Iceland bag it’s like a nylon one that I got free ages ago when they came out, it’s quite good, and I’ve usually got the bags for life, like the better quality ones, I’ve got a load of them in the drawer so I’ll take them, I’m more organised if I know I’m going for a shop like if I’m going to Aldi’s I’ll take my bags, if I remember, but likes of if I just nip in for milk and stuff after work I’ve never got a bag with me, that’s when I’ve got to buy they horrible wee thin things.
Interviewer: And the bags of your own that you have, so you said that you have some of the bags for life?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of bags for life are these?
Participant: I think I’ve got Asda and Aldi and Tesco, I think I’ve got a mix of them all.
Interviewer: But I man what kind of quality?
Participant: Plastic, the thick plastic ones.
Interviewer: Thick plastic and these are like woven ones or just…
Participant: No, I have got a couple of woven ones as well actually but just the thick plastic ones.
Interviewer: And how many of those do you usually take shopping?
Participant: Maybe about 5 or 6.
Interviewer: And they’re just from different shops?
Participant: Yeah, just I’ve picked up, yeah.
Interviewer: They’re always the same type of bag, yeah?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what is the reason why you prefer using those as compared to your normal kind of woven bags and study type you know, those that don’t break at all virtually?
Participant: Well probably because I’ve not got enough of the sturdy ones that don’t break at all,. But I don’t mind the bags for life because you can get your shopping in and they don’t break as well, so they’re quite handy, it’s just those wee thin things I can’t stand.
Interviewer: Do you have any you know, the thin type, single use plastic bags at all?
Participant: Yeah, I very rarely take them, I’ve got some in the house, sometimes I use them for like chucking my grandson’s football boots in or stuff like that, but I don’t really use them for shopping because they’re hopeless.
Interviewer: So you don’t use them for shopping?
Participant: No, I wouldn’t take them with me, I just use them for like either rubbish or football boots or something like that.
Interviewer: I see, yeah.
Participant: Honestly, you’ve no idea how thin they’ve made them, they just don’t hold nothing, they’re just, it’s like a punishment for not taking a bag, that’s what it’s like, honestly, I’m not joking, and like Asda’s not bad because you can buy, if you’re in Asda you can buy a thicker one as well but see like the wee corner shops and that that I’ve maybe stopped for milk, that’s all they sell so you’ve not even got an option of buying a better one, and aye, it’s like a punishment, that’s another word to describe that, a punishment.
Interviewer: And your bags for life, the plastic bags for life that you have at home, sorry, that you bring to the shops, do you, when they break what do you do with them?
Participant: I just put them in the bin but I don’t know why I seem to get them, probably my mum giving me stuff because she still goes to Asda and that so I’ve just always kind of got them, but I just put them in the bin, I never ask for another one, I know you’re meant to but I’ve never done that, I’m not that organised.
Interviewer: And did you know you can exchange those bags, plastic bags for life in the shops?
Participant: Yeah, for a new one, yeah, but I’ve never did that.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Just because I’m not usually, I don’t think Aldi does it, I’m not sure, I don’t think they do actually, and obviously when I’m getting them I don’t shop at Asda and that anymore so I must be getting them from my mum so, if Aldi did it I maybe would do it there but I don’t think they do or they’ve never ever offered anyway, I’ve never seen anything saying that they exchange them, but I’ll ask now that you’ve mentioned it next time I’m in.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, what else did I want to ask about those, have you ever tried to you know, do you ever bring an of your own bags from home, like something like fabric bags or anything like that, not really, that’s not…
Participant: No, not really, no.  Do you know what else annoys me? Chinese take-away, see if you’re getting a take-away they’re even thinner and they charge you for the bags as well, or McDonald’s, everywhere, everywhere charges you for food bags, now you’ve not got a choice there, like McDonald’s will say, “are you wanting a bag?”, and you’re driving through and you’ve got the kids and everything, you feel like saying, ”no”, but you haven’t got any, you’ve got to buy the bags, I just don’t agree with it at all, I just think it’s stupid.
Interviewer: Well now you mentioned it reminded me, so sometimes you also need to, when you go shopping do you sometimes need to buy the single use bags?
Participant: Yeah, that’s the ones I hate, yeah, I’ve got to do that quite often because I forget.
Interviewer: And why do you not buy like bags for life at that moment?
Participant: I do, I do if I’ve got the choice but a lot of the shops haven’t got the choice here…
Interviewer: Oh, I see.
Participant: …like the chemist, aye, see like Superdrug and things, they’re wee flimsy bags as well, or Savers I think, the chemist, if there’s a choice I’ll always pay extra and get a bag for life, but a lot of the shops don’t do them.
Interviewer: Yeah, sure, and do you use bags for life for anything else other than bringing your shopping in afterwards?
Participant: Uhuh, probably like taking stuff to my son’s, putting the kid’s clothes and stuff like that, for carrying, yeah, but that’s probably it.
Interviewer: Where do you store the shopping bags that you bring with you?
Participant: I’ve got a drawer, in the kitchen in the drawer.
Interviewer: And is it easy for you to remember to take those or not always?
Participant: It should be but I don’t, I’ve not got some n the boot, I remember when I’m going for a big shop but when I’m just going for a wee shop or whatever I don’t, I was in Iceland yesterday actually, I went in there for milk and I didn’t have any bags so I had to 2 bags when I was in Iceland, and they’re another one that just does the wee thin things, they didn’t have any bags for life either.
Interviewer: Yeah, and in your opinion how important it is to have plastic bags available in stores, in supermarkets?
Participant: Very important.
Interviewer: What would happen if plastic bags completely disappeared from the stores?
Participant: Then you would have to remember to take your own do you know what I mean, you would have to obviously, you would think, “oh”, but you would just have to do, it’s just like everything else eh, you’ve just got to get on with it.
Interviewer: And how would you find it?
Participant: I would probably forget for a few times and then I would be fine, I would just, I would be alright.
Interviewer: So you’ve mentioned at some point obviously that Scotland has that 5p charge for the carrier bags, for the smaller ones and do you remember when you heard of it for the first time?
Participant: I think it was a few years ago, a year ago maybe, it seems a wee while now.
Interviewer: So was it just before the charge was introduced in Scotland?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And what do you think about this 5p plastic bag charge?
Participant: I think it’s ridiculous, I think it’s absolutely ridiculous, I just think it’s a waste of money, I just think you’re buying their stuff, especially takeaways and stuff like that, I just do, I just think that, and you can’t even like, see when you’re packing your shopping there’s not even wee bags for like I used to put my yoghurts in another bag just in case they leaked, there’s not even anything like that now either, fish, I bought fish out of Asda, that was about a month of 2 ago, but I got it in a foil bag to put in the oven but when I got to checkout I said to her, “have you got like another bag to put that in?”, she says, “oh no, it’s just the 5p bags or the bags for life”, which is a bit do you know what I mean, before you used to have remember the piles of plastic bags you could put it in that, then you’d put it in your carrier, so no, I just don’t like it.
Interviewer: And do you…
Participant: I don’t think it saves on recycling or anything at all, I really don’t think it makes any difference.
Interviewer: Do you find it surprising that plastic bag charge came to effect?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Why is it surprising?
Participant: Because I just think we’ve always had bags and I think they’ve always been free, or maybe when I was younger they weren’t, maybe they were 2p back then, I can’t remember, but I just think that you should get your bags free where you buy your purchase, like you’ve even got to pay for them like in B&Q and Homebase and clothes shops as well, it’s not just food, it’s everywhere, so if you go into Next and you buy a pair of trousers you’ve got to pay 5p for the bag, if you go into a charity shop and you buy something you’ve got to pay 5p for the bag, it’s everywhere.
Interviewer: What do you think are the main purposes of this charge?
Participant: I think it was to try and get people to recycle more or use the bags more, I don’t know, it’s one of the stupid things that they start in Scotland and they don’t follow through anywhere else, it’s just stupidity.
Interviewer: And do you think it might have any purposes like environment related or economy related, anything like that?
Participant: I think it’s meant to but like I think it’s just, I don’t know, I don’t know, I’m not sure.
Interviewer: Yeah, that’s fine, and did the introduction of the plastic bag charge a year ago affect you at all?
Participant: No, it’s just a nuisance, it doesn’t have any, the 5p is neither here nor there, it’s just annoying, if they were good quality bags for 5p I probably wouldn’t bother so much if I’m being honest, but it’s just they’re rubbish and I mean rubbish bags that really infuriate me, so if they were maybe a bit more decent, if they were all the ones that you could use for life that would fine, that would be more, because you’re just still flinging the wee cheap things out do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Yeah, and did you yourself used to take more bags before the charge…
Participant: No.
Interviewer: …or what kind of bags actually did you use?
Participant: I used to, well Tesco, it was Tesco I shopped at then, their bags were quite good quality anyway, they weren’t as good at the bags for life but they were good enough to maybe like carry your milk and bread and what you, so no I always used what I needed, I never eve took any more bags anyway because I couldn’t be bothered with them about the house, so no, I wouldn’t say I’m using less bags now.
Interviewer: Did you use the bags for life at that stage at all or was it mostly the free ones?
Participant: No, it was mostly the carriers, yeah.
Interviewer: So after the charge was introduced you changed to…
Participant: Yeah, well I was forced to because they made the bags even thinner, if they’d kept the bags the same quality I wouldn’t have bothered but you’re kind of forced to buy them because they’re that poor quality.
Interviewer: I see, and you know that this charge is also, basically it exists in Wales for about I think 3 years, 3, 4 years?
Participant: Oh no, I didn’t know that, I thought it was just in Scotland, right, I didn’t know that.
Interviewer: Yeah, Scotland was, I think Ireland and Scotland was about the same time, I think Scotland first and, Scotland second and then Ireland third, and basically England is going to have it now in October.
Participant: Oh right, okay.
Interviewer: Yeah, it’s the last, so basically all the UK is going to have it, and in England they will not apply this charge to some shops, for example corner shops and you know, medium-to-small retailers you will not need to pay 5p for the bags there, and also hot food take-always and things like clothing shops…
Participant: See that makes more sense, that is a lot more sensible, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, and also paper and biodegradable bags, so those will not be charged.
Participant: Aye, that makes a lot more sense, that what they should do here as well.
Interviewer: And why does it make more sense to you?
Participant: Because like the take-away bags and stuff, well you just expect to get it with your food, you’re paying enough for the food without buying the extra bags, and I like the idea of the bio, like the brown bags and stuff, like getting them free because obviously they recycle, I just think it’s more fair and clothes, it’s just annoying to think, ”oh here we go, another 6p for another rubbish bag”, so no, I think it’s fair, what you’ve just said sounds much better.
Interviewer: And you know, compared to other types of charges how does plastic bag charge look like, for example if we think about you know, the charges on fuel prices for the environmental reasons, how do you think these kind of charges compares to the plastic bag charge?  Would you be in favour of you know, slight rise of petrol prices so people drive less or not?
Participant: No, I would be definitely against that as well.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Because I drive quire a lot for my work and taking kids to school and that, like they stay too far away so there’s not any option and I just think we pay enough tax without them trying to tax everything else and make the excuse for the environment, so definitely no.
Interviewer: Well another thing would be something like if there were, it doesn’t exist in the country but it exists in other places on the Continent, it exists in Germany, Austria, they have you know, plastic bottles, when people buy those they pay a little deposit, just a few pence, and when they bring those empty bottles back, plastic bottles, they get the deposit back to them, what…
Participant: I don’t think that would work because we’ve got hat just now our glass bottles with Irn-Bru and stuff, with Barrs, I don’t know if you know that…
Interviewer: Yes, someone mentioned that to me today, yeah.
Participant: Yeah, and they’re stopping that because people aren’t taking the bottles back and you get 30p for a glass bottle.
Interviewer: Right, do you have an idea why people don’t do that anymore?
Participant: I think again you know, I don’t buy a lot of glass bottles but they lie in my cupboard as well until I’m tidying my cupboard out and then, I think maybe years ago you had the ice cream van so it was easy to nip out to the ice cream van.
Interviewer: And how much is that deposit in Scotland?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And people don’t want to get 30p back?
Participant: No, that’s how they’re going to stop it, it was on the news last week, so there you go, so I don’t think it would do any good with plastic ones.
Interviewer: And is this only Barr that does this?
Participant: Yeah, well as far as I know, yeah.
Interviewer: Interesting, yeah, I don’t, I have never heard of anything else in the UK like this at the moment, people used to do that in the past but…
Participant: That’s right, well no, they still do it, but a lot of the shops aren’t so keen to take them as well, like if I take them back I always buy more juice with them, I don’t buy anything else, before you even get the chance to say it they’ll say, “remember you’ve got to, you don’t get money back”, and I think oh here we go I know that, so the shopkeepers aren’t that keen and I can remember, I’ve never went back to the shop, it was a couple of years ago, it was my mum, she used to buy like the bottles all the time and I’d went round, I think I’d had about 15 or something, it was just near Christmas, she was clearing out, and the guy wouldn’t take them, he said he had no room for them, so I’ve never went back to that shop since, so I think probably that’s why people don’t want to take them back too because the shops aren’t too keen.
Interviewer: And is it Barr themselves who give the deposit back or is it supermarkets?
Participant: Well what happens is, no, either at the supermarkets, you can’t take them there, it’s only the corner shops that take them, the wee shops, they’ll like, say I got 10 bottles, that would be £3, I would get 3 bottles of juice for that, then when they get, when the Barrs’ lorry comes they’ll just deduct that from, they’ll give it back to them and then they’ll deduct that from their bill, so it’s Barrs that’s paying it, but supermarkets don’t take the glass bottles back, it’s only the small shops.
Interviewer: Right, interesting, okay, and you know, coming back again to the plastic bag charge you know, what do you think will happen as you know, like all the UK is going to have it now and what do you think will be the result in about 10 years’ time?
Participant: I think you’ll just get used to it, and people will maybe take their bags more, I think it’ll just be something everybody’ll just pay, it’s just something you’ve got to do like everything else, as time goes on you forget, you just do it automatic.
Interviewer: So do you think people will start paying them again or not?
Participant: I think, yeah, I don’t think it’ll change, I think the people that are disorganised will always be disorganised, the people that’s organised, I don’t think there’ll be that much change because it is only 5p.
Interviewer: Okay, so it’s not much basically, yeah?
Participant: No, no, I don’t think there’ll be that much change.
Interviewer: Okay, now we’re going just kind of briefly to a different point which is you know, some of the behaviours we were asking in the diary, and I’ll just ask a couple of questions on those.  Do you tend to send electricity and like energy at all at home?
Participant: Do I tend to?
Interviewer: To save energy?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, no I try, I try and put my lights off and that when I’m not, and I do, well mainly I do all my washes at 30 now, I’m not fanatical about it but I do try and watch what I’m doing because electric and that is that expensive.
Interviewer: Is this a kind of habit for you or do you need to think a little bit about this stuff?
Participant: No, it’s habit now.
Interviewer: Not a habit?
Participant: It is a habit, yeah, n I do it automatically, yeah, I never used to, I used to always leave lights on everywhere and that, but no, I’m definitely more conscious now.
Interviewer: And regarding the household waste, do you, what do you do with the waste at home?
Participant: I’ve got two bins, one’s recycling for like plastic bottles and papers and stuff and my other one just for general waste, that’s the only recycling I do.
Interviewer: And are you happy with the recycling what the Council provides you for recycling?
Participant: Yeah, they give us a bin but they only do our household rubbish collection every 2 weeks now, I think that’s not good enough, it used to be every week and they changed it last years, so I don’t agree with that, I think, specially people with families, because all it’s done is the bins are all full, the streets are messy and you see rubbish getting dumped everywhere, so that’s not so good, I’m fine because I’ve not got, if I’m having a clear out I just go to my local tip anyway but like my neighbour they’ve got kids and oh my God their garden’s just, it’s ridiculous with rubbish.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: Every day, constant, yeah, every day, most days.
Interviewer: And what kind of car journeys do you do, where do you go usually?
Participant: I go to my mum’s, I go to my son’s, so they’re kind of local journeys, at weekends and stuff I might go further shopping and stuff.
Interviewer: And are these long distances or not really?
Participant: No, they’re not that long, I’d say maybe 10 miles or so, if I go to Aldi I think it’s about maybe 5 miles away.
Interviewer: Yeah, 5 miles is a long journey then.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And about the way, how you drive, do you try to save…
Participant: Yeah, well aye, I don’t drive fast but I don’t, I’m not, I’m kind of in the middle, I don’t, I’m not a fast drive but I don’t, I’m not, I wouldn’t say I’m that conscious, I just drive.
Interviewer: And do you try to walk or you know, for short distances?
Participant: No, I’m terrible, no, I should but I don’t, no.
Interviewer: Why do you think you should?
Participant: Just for health reasons more than environment to be honest with you, but just by the time you get in from work and stuff you don’t always have time, I should make time, I know that.
Interviewer: And does it happen to you to buy any like eco-friendly products organic, Fair Trade?
Participant: No, no, I very rarely do it, if they’re on offer I might buy them but I don’t go out my way to buy them.
Interviewer: And something like free range whatever, eggs?
Participant: Oh no, I buy free range eggs, I like free range eggs and free range chicken, and I do, I like organic veg sometimes, I’m telling a lie there, sometimes if it looks better I’ll buy that.
Interviewer: And why do you like to buy those?
Participant: Just for the flavour, for the taste rather than anything else, yeah.
Interviewer: Does it happen to you to support environmental organisations, issues or not?
Participant: I don’t actually, I should but I don’t.
Interviewer: But you don’t, yeah?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, and what does “environmentally friendly behaviour” mean to you?
Participant: Just everything you’ve been saying like maybe cutting down on your car, walking more, buying eco-friendly products and stuff, I know what to do I just don’t do it.
Interviewer: And yourself personally, how concerned do you feel about environmental issues?
Participant: I’m not to be honest, I’m not.
Interviewer: You’re not?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: And why?
Participant: Well I live in a town where we’ve got the BP and all the oil and all the chemicals and I think the government and everybody else doesn’t do anything about that so I don’t see any point in trying to do silly wee things that’s not going to make an ounce of difference.
Interviewer: And what does environment mean to you in general?
Participant: I don’t know, I don’t really think that much about it, obviously I don’t like rubbish lying about, I like it kept clean and tidy and stuff like that and I don’t like cruelty to animals or anything, but apart from that I don’t give it that much thought.
Interviewer: Sure, sure, that’s okay, and compared to you know, other issues in the modern society such as social, economic, health  etc, how important the environment is compared to those?
Participant: I’d say the health and all that’s more important, environment’s not that important.
Interviewer: And could you tell us why?
Participant: I just think that we’ve got all the eco things and like the cars and all that but I don’t know, is it really making a difference?  I just don’t, see I don’t see any changes.
Interviewer: Do you feel that you yourself know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: No, probably not, I probably don’t pay enough attention to it.
Interviewer: And why do you say that you think you don’t know enough?
Participant: I think because I’m not that interested, I don’t pay that much attention, if it interested me I’d read ore about it but to be honest it doesn’t really interest me.
Interviewer: And like in terms of skills that you have around environmental stuff, is it also not something that you…
Participant: No, it’s not anything that pay any attention to.
Interviewer: And yeah, yeah, that’s fine, of course, you know, as I said in the beginning we really want people you know, to be…
Participant: Yeah, everybody’s different, yeah.
Interviewer: Yeah, and do you feel that you receive enough support from government or environmental organisations to be more environmentally friendly or not?
Participant: Aye, yeah the information’s there if you want it, yeah.
Interviewer: So do you think it’s given enough or not really?
Participant: No, I think it’s giving enough, yeah.
Interviewer: You think so, uhuh?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: And things like regulation legislation, things like that?
Participant: Yeah, I think there’s enough of that as well.
Interviewer: And are you personally happy with what you’re currently doing for the environment?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: That’s fine, thank you.  Maybe just the last question which is about the neighbourhood, could you tell us yeah, your neighbourhood, could you tell us what you particularly like in your neighbourhood and things you find a bit problematic?
Participant: I like the way it’s pretty safe, there’s not too much crime and stuff, it’s a town so we’ve got like a swimming pool and that, we’ve got quite good amenities.  What I don’t like is we’ve only got one supermarket, no choice, and that’s Asda, which is ridiculous in a huge town, the Tesco shut and nothing’s replaced it so far, and the BP it’s ridiculous, the smells and everything that comes from it and all the dust and stour and nobody cares no matter how much people complain to their MPs and everything, it’s just ridiculous, so that’s what I don’t like about the town, it’s not going to change.
Interviewer: And is there anything, any kind of problems related to the [?? 36:59]  or anything like that or not?
Participant: The rubbish, yeah, the rubbish, the street cleaners don’t clean the streets as often as they used to either, so they’re always quite dirty, there used to be one like in the town centre every day but I don’t see any, well I’m not saying there’s none but I don’t see any anymore and it’s dirty, but the rubbish collection’s definitely, once every 2 weeks for household rubbish is just terrible, and sometimes it can be once every 3 weeks every now and again it’s once every 3 weeks, I don’t know how that works, we’ve got a calendar and I don’t know how many times a year but sometimes, [asks someone else in the room] “how many times a year is it every 3 weeks we get our rubbish, our household rubbish, see the household rubbish bin, occasionally, is it very 3 weeks, oh it’s always every 3 weeks now”, oh sorry, it’s always every 3 weeks now, I thought we still had the 2 weeks, so it’s every 3 weeks so that’s why it’s getting worse.
Interviewer: Yeah, do you live in Glasgow or outside?
Participant: No, I live outside Glasgow, I’m on the outskirts, but Glasgow’s, I think we’re all much the same, it was kind of introduced, I think we had it once a fortnight before they did, but every where’s messy and dirty, and the same like even the public areas used to always be kept nice with flowers and the grass cut and everything, it’s not as looked after as what it used to be either, it looks like tired and not cared for as we [?? 38:40 break in recording] so that’s the Councils cutting their budgets and stuff, so it doesn’t look.
Interviewer: Do you remember when the recycling was introduced?
Participant: Oh years, about 10 years.
Interviewer: Something like 10 years ago?
Participant: Yeah, because I’ve been in this house 7 and I had it in my old house a couple of years, maybe about 9 years.
Interviewer: And was it like collective recycling in the beginning or was it already on your doorstep, recycling bins?
Participant: No, they brought out blue bins, like big ones the same size and I probably didn’t do as much of it then as what I do now, now I recycle kind of everything because I’ve got to because of the way that they pick up the household waste, I’ve got 2 buckets in my kitchen now where years ago it was just if I kind of remembered or what have you, so I’m definitely recycling a lot more.
Interviewer: Yeah, okay, thank you very much Christine for the interesting interview.
Participant: Oh, thank you.
Interviewer: We are done, so I just wanted to ask you a couple of, I mean would you like first of all to add anything to what we’ve just talked about?
Participant: No, no, it was fine, it was interesting.
Interviewer: Anything to emphasise that you’ve got or it’s fine?
Participant: No, no it’s fine.
Interviewer: Okay, great, yeah.