Interviewer: So thank you very much for taking part in the diary study, so we just sort of have one hour to speak about your experiences of the diary study and then just to discuss in detail the questions that we touched upon in the diary just to go into a bit more detail really, and there are no good or bad answers, we’re just interested in your honest opinion.
Participant: Oh right, okay, no problem.
Interviewer: Okay, so do you have any questions before we begin?
Participant: No, just how long is it going to be again?
Interviewer: An hour.
Participant: An hour?
Interviewer: Yeah.
Participant: Okay, no problem.
Interviewer: Okay, so could you please tell us how you found the diary filling experience overall?
Participant: I found it fine, it’s not too taxing, it’s not too long or anything, and in terms of navigating around it’s fine as well.
Interviewer: Was there anything tedious to write down?
Participant: No, no I didn’t think there was to be honest.
Interviewer: And did anything surprise you?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay. So could you please describe your typical food shopping trip?
Participant: In terms of like a big shop or just a…
Interviewer: Sort of how often, what shops, how you get there?
Participant: Cool. Usually we’d get there by car, go, if it was a big shop certainly then go with the family, we go to Asda, I’d say Asda’s usually the main one, I’m trying to think, roughly could spend about £100 sometimes, do you need to know like what things I would buy?
Interviewer: No, no, not what you buy, just sort of how many times a week or month do you go food shopping?
Participant: I would say something like a big shop we try and do that about once a week and then just maybe day-to-day depending on what we’re going to have for dinner or if I’m going to take some things into work for lunch, we’d maybe go to the shops an extra couple of times throughout the week to be honest, and get some smaller things.
Interviewer: Okay, so if you’re going sort of day-to-day is that to Asda as well or to different shops?
Participant: Yeah, sometimes Asda or maybe one of the small Tescos that’s not far, or the odd time if I’m in town I can get something when I come out of work there’s a Marks & Spencers, or there’s a Marks & Spencers near the house as well, or Sainsbury’s.
Interviewer: And how do you plan your food shopping, do you take a list with you?
Participant: The odd time but I roughly know what I’m looking for and what I’m getting, I usually, I probably don’t, probably not the most adventurous when it comes to eating so I tend to get a lot of meat, a lot of the sort of similar things each week.
Interviewer: And you mentioned you tend to go shopping as a family, I just wondered how you coordinate who buys what?
Participant: Well we half in, we share it, we pay from the same card, so it’s both of our money really, it’s not like it’s just me that pays for it, we both have the shared account that we pay from.
Interviewer: Okay, and when you’re deciding what food to buy what is more or less important to you?
Participant: Well say in terms of what is important is I usually start by going after like the meals in terms of dinners and lunches, they’re the things in my head I would shop for first, and I guess the further round the shop you go I always tend to just pick up some, the smaller things, the crisps and biscuits and so on, the wee snack like stuff.
Interviewer: How much of your food goes to waste every week, roughly?
Participant: I wouldn’t say there’s too much, I mean there is like if it’s veg for example, when I’m chopping up some veg then I would leave like the ends off, or if it’s broccoli then I try and chop a bit of the broccoli off and don’t use that, the end of bananas, chop of the top of strawberries, so I would say that there is a wee bit, there is a bit of food wastage in terms of in preparation, but once I’ve cooked the meal and put it on the plate then I don’t really leave any to be honest.
Interviewer: So it’s literally only sort of the bits that you physically can’t eat, like the tops of the strawberries?
Participant: Yeah, I would say yeah pretty much.
Interviewer: Could you tell me 5 words or expression that come to your mind when you hear “supermarket plastic bag”?
Participant: Charged, 5p, bag for life, I don’t know, I wouldn’t say I think about them too much to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, well that’s great, and do you remember a point in your life when you came across supermarket plastic bags for the first time?
Participant: No, I would have been really small, I don’t know, 4 or 5 maybe?
Interviewer: Could you tell us a little bit about that, if you remember?
Participant: I’m trying to think, I can’t remember an out and out specific one time but I can remember being younger and helping like pack the bags sometimes or carrying them for my mum and dad, yeah, I wouldn’t, there’s not an out and out specific first time I can remember.
Interviewer: And what types of bags or containers do you normally use to pack your shopping?
Participant: It’s usually bags, usually I’ll get the 5p bags, I’m full of good intentions, I do plan to take bags along with me but I never, I very, very rarely do, so I usually get the 5p bags which I then use to take some lunch into work or use for like the rubbish or just other things in and around the house.
Interviewer: As kind of like a bin liner?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, that’s exactly what it is, and just general sort of rubbish in and around the house I’ll pick up and put in a bag and then put in the bin, so the ones that I do buy from the shops I use them in the house as well.
Interviewer: And is that the kind of thin plastic ones or the bags for life, or both?
Participant: There’s been the odd time I’ve bought them, in fact I think it was maybe about a month ago I think the person at the till misheard me and gave me about 5 or 6 bags for life, but I just wanted the normal ones, but by that point I couldn’t be bothered changing them, so I’ve got some bags for life there but again I tend to use them for, depending on what I’m doing, for going out with the kids, maybe put some of their clothes in it or like their news hoes for a change or something if we’re out, or again I use them as lunch bags to take some lunch into work with me.
Interviewer: Is that the same for your small shops and your big shops, you tend to buy the normal carrier bags behind the checkouts?
Participant: Yeah, yeah.
Interviewer: Why do you think that bags for life have been given this name?
Participant: Well certainly in comparison to the 5p ones the bags for life will last a lot longer, they can take a lot more weight, they’re certainly a lot more durable than the 5p ones.
Interviewer: So do you think that the bags for life match their name?
Participant: I would say so because I mean people can reuse them and take them back into the ship and fill them again and they can keep using them until they what, snap or burst I guess, which if you put in a decent amount of shopping then you shouldn’t really do that, so I would imagine that they can last for a good while.
Interviewer: So you mentioned you tend to buy the bags, the normal thin ones except from when you accidentally got bags for life, is there any particular reason why you like to buy the single use bags as opposed to the other bags?
Participant: It’s probably, it’s probably, I mean they’re only 5p, I think the bags for life are what, 10p, or maybe a bit more expensive, I can’t remember, but certainly throughout the years growing up and just what you’re used to at the shops, you’re used to sort of the clear plastic ones and as I say, I use them and then bin them, when I’m at home I use them for rubbish and just other stuff around the house and usually they’ll end up in the bin, or if we use they to take lunch into work then I usually just don’t put it in the bin once I’ve finished as well, so I would rather bin a 5p bag than a more expensive bag.
Interviewer: And what’s sort of good about these types of bags and what’s not so good about them?
Participant: Well if you’re only going in for a small shop then, as in maybe just a couple of things, then it’s, I would rather put just a few things in a smaller bag than a big bag for life, there’s sometimes when I go into Sainsbury’s on my way to work in the morning, I think they, I think they’re sort of just normal sized 5p bags are quite sort of styled like a bag for life, and if I’m only going in for, I don’t know, a loaf of bread or just something small, like a single item, then I think that bag seems a bit too much to be honest, just for that one item, so I think the other ones are better for if you’ve got less items to buy, I quite like them as well to be honest, I like them better than the bags for life.
Interviewer: So you don’t really take bags with you when you shopping?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: So do you have some bags sort of stored in your house, the ones that you bring home from the supermarkets, or are they sort of straight in the bin?
Participant: No, I’ve got quite a few and because I go shopping and that’s what I buy, I always buy the 5p ones when I come home and empty the shopping I’ll put them in a big bag under one of my cupboards, so I’ve got a big sort of bag full of bags that I can take out and use for the rubbish, for lunches and anything else, so I don’t really, I can’t remember the last time I ran out to be honest, so I’ve got, I guess I’ve got quite a few bags available.
Interviewer: So in your opinion how important is it to have plastic bags available in stores?
Participant: Well whether it be plastic or not I think bags are the best thing, something with a handle instead of, I mean there’s the odd shop, certain food shops I go in at lunchtime at my work and it’s like a wee, I don’t know if it’s cardboard, but it’s a different style of bag, it’s like a bit more cardboard like, papery, and it’s got wee paper handles and they just sort of rip apart often enough, so I think plastic seems a bit stronger, but as I say whether it is plastic or whatever it may be I think to carry whatever it is you’re buying from the shops you need a decent sized carrier and a handle on it of some sort.
Interviewer: So it’s fairly important then?
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, so what if plastic bags completely disappeared from shops, how do you think you’d find that?
Participant: I’d have a heart attack! It would make shopping a lot more difficult, I mean if it was just the 5p ones that disappeared then fine, I would buy the 10p or more expensive bag for life, but if they all disappeared then I don’t know, I’d maybe have to take a suitcase or something.
Interviewer: So do you know roughly how many plastic bags you have at your house, you mentioned your bag of bags?
Participant: I don’t know, maybe 20 maybe, perhaps.
Interviewer: Okay, so you know what the plastic bag charge is then?
Participant: Say that again, sorry?
Interviewer: You know what the plastic bag charge is?
Participant: Yeah, 5p.
Interviewer: Yeah, so do you know what context you heard about it in for the first time?
Participant: Just through the news if I remember rightly, through the news and then people talking about it, I think it was the point where it was leading up to the day that the 5p charge was introduced, I remember seeing it online and people at my work etc., discussing it.
Interviewer: So what do you think about the charge?
Participant: I don’t know, I think in one hand, my views of it sort of change, in one hand I think the shop or the government or whatever, they should be covering this charge but then on the other hand if you’re buying a, if I’m buying a shopping and the bill is let’s say £80 then I’m probably only going to buy 10 plastic bags at the most which comes to 50p which in the grand scheme of things is nothing, so it doesn’t bother me too much to be honest.
Interviewer: Did you find the introduction of the charge surprising at all?
Participant: Not massively because for long enough now you hear about recycling, recycling almost every product possible, so no, it’s not too surprising that extra costs have been introduced to try and sort of deal with that aspect.
Interviewer: And what do you think is quite good about the charge versus what’s not so good?
Participant: I think it’s good that they’re obviously addressing the recycling issues and I guess if there is a bad point I would say that it’s the customers that are already buying the items from the shops that are being charged, I think the shops or the government should cover that themselves.
Interviewer: Did you know that the 5p plastic bag charge is going to be introduced in England in October?
Participant: Ah right, is it definitely? I heard something about it a while ago but I wasn’t entire sure.
Interviewer: Can you remember where you heard about it from?
Participant: If I remember, I’m trying to think, it was online, I can’t remember what website, I remember it was when I was at work I saw that, I can’t remember what website it was.
Interviewer: Okay, so what do you think are the main purposes of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: To assist with recycling plastics I would imagine, yeah, I would imagine obviously to cover costs of new methods of dealing with how to recycle plastic or reuse, if there’s anything more than that then I’m not aware.
Interviewer: Do you think it’s quite successful in doing that then, helping the recycling of plastics?
Participant: I’m not entirely sure, I don’t know about that but I would imagine that they’re making enough money, decent enough money, they must sell God knows how many bags a day in each shop and there’s thousands of shops about so I would image that there’s enough money there for them to make good progress in what they’re wanting to do.
Interviewer: Did the introduction of the plastic bag charge in your country affect you?
Participant: No, apart from the fact that I pay for it, it doesn’t really, as I say it doesn’t bother me, you’re spending an absolutely tiny fraction of what your shopping bill is anyway so it’s not, it doesn’t affect me one way or the other really, I would rather have a bag than not have the bag.
Interviewer: So you don’t think it’s changed your shopping behaviour or your, the type of bags that you use or buy, other than the fact that you have to pay now?
Participant: No, it doesn’t really bother me to honest, in fact I probably buy more bags than what I should because I don’t like to fill them up to the point where they’re snapping so I’m happy enough to buy the bags to be honest.
Interviewer: Do you think that you’ve become a more environmentally friendly person since the introduction of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: I don’t know if I would say more, I try and do my bit, we have plastic recycling bins, glass, tin, paper, we’ve got like the grass sort of waste and food, food waste bucket as well, so we’ve got, we cover, in terms of my house and my street etc., we cover, we cover everything and I do use those for the plastic and glass etc., so I would like to think that I do my bit, but I don’t really do much more than that.
Interviewer: And that’s all regardless of the plastic bag charge?
Participant: Yeah, I’ve been doing that for years now anyway, so whether there was the charge for the bags or not I’d still be doing it.
Interviewer: Did you notice any changes after the introduction of the charge in your local area and in your country?
Participant: No, not particularly, the only thing I would say I notice is some people don’t want to pay the 5p and they seem happy to carry about 10 items in their hands and struggle up the road, but I don’t really notice any other change to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, so what do you think about how the plastic bag charge policy is being delivered and applied in your country?
Participant: It’s probably as good as it can be. I think when you’re at a checkout where there’s someone there you can obviously ask them for 5, 6, 7 bags and they can give you them and charge you, the only thing that I find a wee bit annoying is if you go to a self-service till some places like Tesco I’ve noticed, they don’t have their bags out anymore so you have to get someone’s attention for them to bring a bag over for you and sometimes to get their attention it’s a nightmare, so that’s the only issue to be honest, come to think of it, that I have, but I mean in terms of everything else about charging everything seems to be running smoothly and how they do it.
Interviewer: Do you think that bag reuse is sufficiently encouraged in your country?
Participant: Yeah, I mean I think it says it on bags, reuse and so on, so I mean I don’t really know what much more could be done that way, you see enough wee signs and recycle bins that have like reuse etc., recycle, so I would imagine I mean there is enough but for myself I always forget to take the bags out with me but as I say I’m happy to go and buy more because I do use them in and around the house, and I think, I know like my mum and dad do and my friends and stuff so I think most people probably use the plastic bags certainly for like bins and other wee things in the house.
Interviewer: And when the 5p charge comes into effect in England there’ll be some types of bag and some types of shops where the charge might not apply, do you think that that’s fair?
Participant: Well I don’t know the reasons why they would or wouldn’t charge, if there was a decent enough reason for them not to charge then fair enough, but I don’t know, is it, are they opting out of this or not?
Interviewer: So it’s more smaller corner shops wouldn’t have to charge for the bags but larger supermarkets would.
Participant: I don’t know, is that because it’s a local business perhaps?
Interviewer: I’m not entirely sure of the reasoning why.
Participant: Do you know, I wouldn’t have any issues with that because if it’s a local business or a local corner shop, if it’s a wee local newsagent sort of shop then chances are you’re not going in to buy like a trolley’s worth of items and then you wouldn’t need X amount of bags, so chances are you would only need 1, maybe 2 bags at the most if you’re in a local sort of newsagent shop, so I wouldn’t, me personally I wouldn’t have an issue with that.
Interviewer: So how do you think the plastic bag charge compares to other charges, for example the congestion charge?
Participant: I don’t really know much about the congestion charge.
Interviewer: So it’s just sort in London, you get charged for driving into like really busy areas.
Participant: I don’t know, I guess if like the rules are the rules and that’s the way it is then it’s up to people who want to go and drive to a certain place then they need to pay, and it’s the same if people want bags then they need to pay, I can see the points to both, I would say they’re fair enough to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, so what if they were going to bring in a charge on plastic bottles or plastic packaging on individually wrapped vegetables, how would you feel about that?
Participant: Well I would like to think that some of the prices for a plastic bottle of juice these days, those sort of taxes are already in place the now, but I don’t know, I think if it goes down the route of introducing more taxes etc., for bottles of juice or whatever it may be then it’s going to just, it’ll end up a bit ridiculous, at the end of the day you’re going to buy the bottle of juice and then put it in a bag and you’re paying an extra tax on the bag so I think to be honest that should be enough.
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge introduction, if anything?
Participant: Sorry, can you repeat that?
Interviewer: What do you think will happen in 10 years’ time as a result of the plastic bag charge, if anything?
Participant: I’d like to think the recycling industry will be better off for it, the carbon emissions will maybe be down in terms of like the environment, so everything from that point of view you would imagine it should be looking a wee bit better than what it is just now, so in 10 years’ time I think you’d be looking back and saying introducing that tax was a good idea.
Interviewer: Do you save water at home?
Participant: Do I save water?
Interviewer: Yeah, like turning off taps, things like that.
Participant: Yes, I don’t just leave them running, but yeah, I don’t, I certainly don’t leave them running if I’m doing the dishes, I don’t walk away and the sort of go back to them, I usually if I’m using he tap for the dishes or pouring a glass of water or whatever, I use it just for what I need, I wouldn’t say I would use any more than what I need to.
Interviewer: And do you try to save water in any other ways?
Participant: I wouldn’t say I try to save it, I don’t, if I’m running a shower I don’t, in my head I don’t think I need to run as little water as possible here, but again I wouldn’t run the shower for 20 minutes before I go in or whatever, I think some people may do, I wouldn’t say I go out my way to save water but I certainly don’t waste it either.
Interviewer: What about energy?
Participant: Well, I would say I probably use a fair bit, I like to have lights on in the house, not that I’m afraid of the dark but I just, I like the house to have lights on, I’ve got the TV on, computer, laptop, I charge my phone often enough, I don’t often turn things off at the plug, so in terms of like the TV I’ll turn that off but it’ll be on standby, so I don’t really turn it off at the wall often, the very odd time I do but I don’t even know why I do that. No, so I wouldn’t say I’m an energy saver to be honest.
Interviewer: Do you reuse things at home?
Participant: Like what?
Interviewer: Jam jars, bottles, I don’t know, cardboard.
Participant: No, I don’t, I wouldn’t say I do to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay, and when you’re doing your food shop do you ever look at or pay attention to the packaging that the products are in?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Is the packaging of the product important to you at all?
Participant: Oh right, no, not massively, it’s the item that I’m buying to be honest is what I’m interested in, what it is that I’m going to eat, I don’t mind if it’s in a plastic wrapping or like a wee cardboard box or whatever, I really don’t mind.
Interviewer: And you mentioned earlier that you recycle a lot of your household waste.
Participant: Yeah.
Interviewer: What kind of things do you recycle, I know you mentioned somethings before?
Participant: I mentioned like glass, if I have the odd say glass bottle of juice or bottles of beer, tins in terms of cans of juice, the odd, I don’t know, let’s say a tin of beans or something, sometimes if it’s like a pasta sauce a glass jar there, paper, it’s not often that I buy a newspaper for the house but if I buy one when I’m out at work and I bring it home then I put that in the paper bag, I put some letters, if I need to shred some letters I’ll shred them first and then I would put them out into the paper bag, there’s food wastage again going back to like preparing the meals, like cutting up veg and some fruit etc., then I tend to always sort of cut the edges off of it or the skin on carrots, potatoes, so that sort of thing would go in the food wastage box, or if I’m cutting grass or whatever then there’s the grass bin as well.
Interviewer: And why do you recycle?
Participant: Well to be honest my mum and dad have recycled for as long as I can remember so I’m in the habit to do that, and slosh the bins don’t get collected for 2 weeks, I create enough rubbish and so on in my house as it is so if I was to not recycle, if I was to put all of the items that I’m putting out my house, if I was to put them all in the one rubbish bin then it would be full within a week, so if I can spread that around and put them into the right boxes etc., then it means that my rubbish bin’s not going to be too full.
Interviewer: How often do you drive?
Participant: I’m trying to think of an average, a few times a week perhaps, it’s depending on what I’m doing, if I’ve got plans maybe to go and see the family or take the kids somewhere or I don’t know, go to the shops, then it’ll be a few times a week, 2, 3, 4 times a week, whereas there’s sometimes I’ll have quite a quiet week, it would only maybe the once.
Interviewer: And do you drive in a fuel efficient way?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Switching to high gears, smooth acceleration.
Participant: Yeah, I mean I would, yeah, I mean I don’t, I’m not exactly in 5th gear at 20 miles an hour but I would say yeah, I change gears decent enough, at the right sort of time to be honest.
Interviewer: And is that a habit do you think?
Participant: Yeah, well come to think of it it probably is, yeah.
Interviewer: And do you walk or cycle for short distances?
Participant: No, I don’t.
Interviewer: Okay, do you ever buy eco-friendly cleaning products?
Participant: I’m not too sure off the top of my head, usually that’d be my girlfriend that picks up the cleaning products, I’m not too sure.
Interviewer: Okay, what about organic food?
Participant: The odd time, I wouldn’t say I specific shop for it though, there’s the odd time I’ll pick up some items that are organic, but in general I wouldn’t say I go out my way to shop for them.
Interviewer: Do you know sort of roughly how often then you do buy organic food?
Participant: I would say certainly, if I do a main shop once a week then I would certainly say most times I do a big shop which over the course of a month I would say I maybe buy some organic products maybe 3 times.
Interviewer: Okay, and why do you buy organic food?
Participant: Just again I wouldn’t specifically shop for it but if it’s there and it looks nice then I pick the odd things up, there’s no real specific reason to be honest.
Interviewer: And what about sustainable foods that goes towards protecting animal welfare, forests or fisheries?
Participant: Sorry, say that again?
Interviewer: Do you ever buy sustainable food that goes towards protecting animal welfare, forests or fisheries?
Participant: No, I don’t think so, no.
Interviewer: And do you support any environmental organisations and issues?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay, so all of these behaviours we’ve just sort of mentioned, water, energy, recycling, things like that, have you noticed anything about these behaviours during the diary period?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: Just sort of whilst filling out the diary have you thought, oh, I don’t know, I do this a lot or oh I don’t do this a lot, or anything really?
Participant: Yes, what I found like as I say I don’t specifically save water but I don’t waste it either, so I didn’t really think much about that, but I certainly thought about the likes of lights, I have quite a lot of lights on all the time, I’ve got the heating on often enough, and that’s even in the summer, so things like that, I mean my mum and dad go on as well which kind of annoys me, “you’ve got too much stuff on, your bill’s will be sky high”, but that’s what I like, I like to be comfortable in my house, but yeah, I did have a think, maybe I overdo it with some things, if I’m sitting down the stairs I don’t need a room up the stairs with a light on, which I do, yes, I’ve thought maybe I should try and a bit of an effort to cut the electricity consumption down.
Interviewer: Okay, and what does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Say that again, sorry?
Interviewer: What does environmentally friendly behaviour mean to you?
Participant: Well, recycling would be one, using products, safe products etc., I mean you hear about not using like deodorant spray cans, use roll-ons etc., so the likes of those things is what I think of, but again I think I do well enough by separating like my rubbish, as I say glass and tine and paper etc., and the food, so I do all my recycling stuff that way, so that’s mostly the way I would think about it.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about environmental issues?
Participant: On one hand I don’t probably think about it too much, but then there’s the other hand, you come across the odd story in the news or online and when you hear it you get a bit more of an insight to it and obviously it opens your eyes and you can see, but I would say that there is more sort of pressing issues going on in the world that I guess via the news etc., that are more frontline news than recycling etc., and the environment.
Interviewer: So do you think the environment is an important part of your identity and your life, or not really?
Participant: I would probably say not really, it’s not that I don’t have an interest or I’m not concerned but I’m not out going through forests at the weekend picking up everybody’s rubbish and doing stuff like that, so I would just say not really to be honest.
Interviewer: Is there any reason why?
Participant: No, not particularly to be honest, again I don’t dislike the idea of recycling and trying to keep the environment clean etc., I just, I just don’t really do too much I guess.
Interviewer: And how concerned, if at all, are you about the amount of waste that you create?
Participant: I don’t know if I’d say concerned, I try not to create any more rubbish and give myself more housework as such to clean up and so on, but compared, myself, my family compared to neighbours etc., then we’re no worse than the average household I would say in terms of what we’re putting out there, so I wouldn’t say I’m particularly concerned.
Interviewer: So compared to other issues in modern society, you mentioned before sort of there are more pressing issues in the world going on, so do you think sort of compared to social issues, economic issues, things like that, would you say you think environmental issues are less important then?
Participant: Well again if you’re go and read the stuff about the environment then you could, in your own head you could say well that’s more important than anything, but I would say, I don’t know if I would say it’s more or less important than what’s going on when you see some of the stuff that’s going on in the news, people being killed etc., every day, I would say that people being killed is more of a concern than the environment, it’s more of an immediate concern, I think the environment etc., obviously is a long-term concern.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you know enough about environmental issues?
Participant: I know more about it than say some of my friends, but in the big picture probably not, not really.
Interviewer: Do you think that’s something you would like to improve or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah I mean, again if there was, I mean I read the news from different sources etc., so if there was more environmental sort of issues or stories out there, a bit more, as I say a bit more pressing then I would have more of an interest and I would read up on it a little more, again it’s not like I have a dislike or anything for it, I just, when you go and look at the news and see what’s out there there tends to be more pressing sort of stuff.
Interviewer: And do you feel that you have sufficient skills to do things for the environment?
Participant: Well I certainly, as I say I do my own recycle bins etc., I don’t know if there’s much more I can do, I don’t know if there’s much more I could do than that off the top of my head.
Interviewer: Okay, so do you feel that you receive enough support to be able to be environmentally friendly, or not?
Participant: Yeah, yeah, I mean if you want to be then I’m sure you can, there’s nothing against being environmentally friendly, so yeah, I would imagine that there’s support out there, in terms of the support I get I don’t know, the Council provide recycling bins etc., I notice that shops now there’s, sometimes there’s bins for plastic and then there’s general rubbish bins, so I would say that there’s enough support out there for people that want to [?? 47:59]
Interviewer: From the government as well, do you feel like you receive enough support?
Participant: Me personally, I wouldn’t say I do, not from the government, or people in general I’m not too sure to be honest, no, I don’t know, I know there’s, I don’t know, wind turbines and solar systems and AD plants and all that if you connect it to the grid obviously the landowner or the company that owns that will get paid tariffs etc., so maybe from, if you’re in that sort of end of things then you would maybe say the government does enough to help you, but for the general person out there I don’t, I don’t think so.
Interviewer: And what do you think about the legislation and the regulation in the environmental area in your country?
Participant: What do you mean?
Interviewer: So how environmental areas say are kind of regulated.
Participant: In terms of like the recycling system?
Interviewer: Yeah, just in general, anything that sort of pops into your head really.
Participant: The only thing I would say is there’s recycling bins here and there, there’s obviously the bins at my house, people fill then, they get collected regular, I think every week, so I mean I would say that’s a decent enough service, a decent enough effort from the local government.
Interviewer: So do you think there’s anything else that could be done or do you think there’s enough out there already?
Participant: I think for like family households I think to be honest I think it’s probably as much as they can do without it taking a whole day sometimes to separate the rubbish into various different bins and stuff and then take them out to the recycle bins, and the out to the street etc., it can just be an extra wee bit of time on to whatever it is you’re doing, so I think for family households that’s probably enough. In terms of say bigger businesses or what, then I don’t know if there’s enough being done there.
Interviewer: Do you know what else could be done, or?
Participant: I don’t know, maybe they could have, I don’t know, for shops for example, I don’t know, maybe they could use more recycled products, I don’t know, trolleys, baskets, I don’t know, someone else could think better than I, they could use more recycled things in and around their shops perhaps.
Interviewer: And are you happy with what you are currently doing for the environment, or not?
Participant: Yeah, I’m happy, yeah.
Interviewer: Okay, are there any of your environmental behaviours that you’re particularly happy with?
Participant: I’m just happy that I’d what I do, as I say I fill all the recycle bins etc., and put them out when they should be collected so I do, from that point of view, what’s coming in and out of this household we recycle pretty much everything that can be recycled so, yeah, I certainly do my bit I would say.
Interviewer: And is there anything in this area, any of your behaviours in this area that you’re not so happy with?
Participant: No, not really.
Interviewer: Okay, so what are the main problems, if any, in your neighbourhood?
Participant: In my neighbourhood?
Interviewer: Mhmm.
Participant: I wouldn’t say there’s any problems to be honest, when it comes to recycling day you can see them, you can see the bins out in front of pretty much everyone’s house, they’re usually sort of full looking, they get collected and then the same happens the following week, so I wouldn’t say there’s any problems in terms of recycling sort of stuff,. Everything, the bulk of the houses do it, so I would say it’s, they’re all doing what they should be doing.
Interviewer: Okay, so we’re just sort of coming towards the end now, is there anything that you want to add or emphasise?
Participant: No.
Interviewer: Okay.