IV18

A	Interviewer – 	Sam
B	Interviewee – IV18

A	OK, thanks very much.  So are you working in [removed] [removed] or [removed] [removed]?
B:	In [removed] [removed].  
A:	OK and how long have you, I mean I suppose to begin with it would just be really handy to get a little bit of information about your routine on a daily basis and how long you’ve worked there and so on?
B:	So I’ve worked here since the department was formed and as one department and we moved over here, I think it was about two years, may be a little bit longer.  I also worked in this building previously around about 2004/5 when it was a [removed] building.
A:	OK right OK, that’s fantastic. So you have experience of both this building without air-conditioning and presumably when you were in [removed], before you moved into [removed] [removed] you were in a different building again?
B:	That’s right, but I think when this building was a [removed] building it had air-conditioning because it had just been refurbished.
A:	Right OK yes.  OK.  So I suppose the sort of overall sort of arching topic of my, that I’d like to try and get to grips with is sort of how air-conditioning is sort of shaping life there at [removed] [removed] and how it’s sort of changed?  What happens on a daily basis, I suppose in the minutia, the detail, since it’s been installed.  So I mean when you were working in the building previously in 2004, 2005 were you working at the same place in that building or?
B:	I think it was possibly on a different floor, so a different part of the building.
A:	Right OK.  And what would have been your daily routine sort of coming to work in the building sort of thing?
B:	Well I think at that time I would have generally worked about 9.30 till 5.30, 6.00. Now I tend to come in a bit earlier and leave a bit earlier because my working pattern is around 8.00 till 5.00 occasionally 8.00 till 4.00.
A:	OK and in terms of when you arrive in the building what are you doing, how are you moving around, are you sitting at a desk?
B:	Well we have a hot-desking set up so each of us has a work area and so the first thing I do is find a desk and then go and collect my bits and pieces, so computer and any files I need for the day from lockers. And I can get set up. 
A:	Right OK.  And do you usually stay at the same place in the building all day or do you move around?
B:	It depends on the day I mean some days if we’ve got a lot of meeting I’ll come in and sit at my desk a very short period of time.  Other days, which are less meeting heavy, I might be at my desk pretty much all the day.  
A:	Right OK.  And was it the same sort of set up when you were in the building previously in 2004, 2005?
B: 	I think the big difference previously was that rather than have a hot-desking arrangement we had a desk each and a fixed computer, a desktop computer rather then a laptop. So the occupancy rate was a lot lower then because you’d obviously have people away on business or you’d have people on leave or for some other reason out of the office.  Whereas now in the busier times we have 100% occupancy with every single desk taken. 
A:	Right OK.  And I mean how do you, when you come in and work, how do you sort of choose whereabouts in the building you are going to work?  Is there a regular place that you will usually go to or does it change?
B:	Well each team has a work area or each team has an allocation of desks, which is on a 7 to 10 desk ratio.  So if you’ve got 30 people in the team you’ll have 21 desks in a particular area.
A:	Yes OK.  So you’re confined to, and are those desks all on one floor?
B:	Yes.
A:	So you’re confined to a sort of single floor in the building?
B:	Yes.  Well you can sit anywhere and on occasion people do.  So for example if I came in later and all 21 desks were gone then I’d have to find another area to sit, perhaps with another team where they had some space.  And there are a couple of other areas that you can go to, there’s a touchdown area on the ground floor, which you can sit and work in.
A:	Right OK.  So how regularly would you sort of be moving away from the desk and moving around the building, sort of typically?
B:	It varies but I think every day usually there’s a meeting or something else, which involves going away from you r desk and being somewhere else in the building.  But probably not working somewhere else if you see what I mean.
A:	Yes, yes, OK.  And does this routine change throughout the year of is it pretty much the same across the year?
B:	Pretty much the same, the main quieter periods are around Christmas, New Year and the summer, particularly around parliamentary recess because there is less, there are fewer demands at those times generally.  So you may find that there are fewer meetings and a bit more time to do some of the kind of work that you don’t get to do during the rest of the time like filing and general organisation.
A:	I can imagine, yes.  So in those periods do you sort of confine yourself more regularly to a sort of single area of the building, a single desk, you don’t move around so much?
B:	Yes I think that’s right.
A:	And do you ever move around because you’re feeling uncomfortable in the building in terms of your temperature and so on?
B:	I have done, yes, on occasion.
A:	That’s interesting.  So if you could sort of describe one of those occurrences?  What was it that brought your attention to the temperature?
B:	Well we’ve had lots and lots of discussions on this floor about temperature.
A:	Sorry which floor are you on?
B:	This is the fourth floor and in particular there was a time when the temperatures on the floor were extremely hot and several of us brought in thermometers to be able to check what the temperatures were and make complaints about the temperature in the building and on those occasions some others did try to find other places here on the same floor or on different floors to work in because it was just very uncomfortable.
A:	Right OK.  So when was that, what sort of time of year was that?
B:	I don’t think it was at the height of summer, I think it was the spring or autumn.
A:	Right OK, that’s really interesting.  So I mean do you remember what sort of temperature with your thermometer it was getting up to?
B:	25, 26 degrees.
A:	Right OK, OK.  And was the air-conditioning system working at that point?
B:	Well it wasn’t clear. I think certainly on one of these occasions there was a fault found so what we were told was that the central system was reporting that the temperatures were OK on the floor but this was due to a fault and a fault in the reporting aswell as the air-conditioning. So everything looked OK even though it wasn’t.
A:	Right, OK.  So there was a fault with the sensor or something like that?
B:	Yes.
A:	And during that period, when there was a fault with the sensor how did you cope with the higher temperatures, what were you able to do?  Were you able to for example change your clothing or?
B:	Well not to any extent that helps really because obviously it’s a business environment so you know if you’ve come to work in a suit then obviously you can take off a tie and you can roll up your sleeves but that isn’t really going to cool you down enough if it’s 27 degrees in the office.  You know you need to be wearing shorts and a polo shirt for that kind of weather.  So I mean occasionally you know at those times you’d sort of try to find a way to cool down by using cold water on your wrists or carrying a hanky to wipe sweat away, using a fan if there were ones available on the floor, try and find somewhere cooler to sit.  On occasion though there were myself and a couple of other people didn’t feel well as a result so we went home.
A:	Right OK, that’s really interesting.  So when you went home did you report about a health and safety incident?
B:	I wouldn’t have used those words.
A:	OK how did you?
B:	I think I just notified my Line Manager that I was leaving for that reason.
A:	Right OK.  And I mean was that OK to do that, was there further action taken as a result?
B:	Sorry, [removed] yes.
A:	So what happened then, I mean after you went home, did your boss sort of get onto the Facilities Team and say look?
B:	I’m not sure if that happened but certainly I think after a period of a number of complaints then eventually something was done about it.  I think eventually they realised that the central sensors wasn’t telling them something that was consistent with the complaints they were getting from the floor and so when they sent an engineer to actually investigate it on the floor then they realised that there was a problem.
A:	Right OK.  And I mean how long did it take them, how long did this all take, how long did it take till?
B:	Several weeks, I’d say about six weeks.
A:	OK and that was until the air-conditioning system was back on?
B:	Was fixed, yes.
A:	And after the air-conditioning system had been fixed were you comfortable again?
B:	Yes.
A:	Right OK.  So after the air-conditioning system had been fixed you didn’t need then to change your clothing anymore or move around or that sort of thing, you were able to work normally?
B:	Yes that’s right.
A:	OK. So I mean just in terms of the detail of the changing, the way you changed your clothes, may be you could just describe for me what you wear normally on a everyday basis to work and how you modified your clothing, particularly in that set of circumstances, that would be really interesting.
B:	So usually I’d wear a suit to work and a long sleeved shirt and I don’t usually wear a tie unless I need to put one on for meetings.  And that’s generally comfortable enough though I find the office to be a bit too hot; some others find it to be a bit too cold.  And if I’m too hot in the office what I’ll generally do is roll up my sleeves and drink more water, try and find a cooler space to sit in for a while.	
A:	OK.  And did you wear the same; were you dressing the same way in 2004, 2005 when there wasn’t air-conditioning in the building?
B:	Yes, that would have been right.
A:	OK and I mean were you comfortable then, so you had the same suit on and so on, or same type of suit I suppose?
B:	It’s difficult to recollect but I don’t recall there being any problems with temperatures back in that period.  And actually I thought the building was air-conditioned then, immediately after the refurbishment.
A:	So you were working in the building immediately after it was being refurbed?
B:	After it had been refurbished, yes.
A:	Ah right I see.
B:	Because they refurbished this block whilst we were working in the one next to it and then we moved over as [removed] and currently we were working in this building whilst they were refurbishing the one that we used to work in next door. 
A:	OK.  So when you were working in the non air-conditioned building next door were you wearing the same clothing then?
B:	Yes.
A:	OK and again were you comfortable in that environment?
B:	No, well for the most part yes, I think the difficulties came there, I remember there was one winter when the boiler broke and so you know we were sat in the office absolutely freezing.  There was a particular piece of work that we had to get out, a deadline, so we just had to get on with it.  But I think the temperature in the office then had fallen to something silly like you know 16 but it felt really cold.  16 doesn’t sound particularly cold but it did feel cold.
A:	Yes absolutely.  And were there any periods when you were working in that non air-conditioned environment where you felt too hot?
B:	Yes but I think that because we were able to open windows you know we were able to regulate the temperatures reasonably well.
A:	Yes.  So I mean would you open a window before you would adjust your clothing?  Sorry that’s quite a detailed question isn’t it?
B:	Yes I’m not sure actually, I’m not sure I couldn’t say.
A:	OK. OK.  So you were saying that in the building that you’re in at the moment there are sort of warmer and cooler spaces.  I suppose I’d be interested to know where are they, I mean you’re on the fourth floor do you often move around across the floors?
B:	Not really no.  I mean the problem is that obviously other floors, other people are working on them. So it’s a bit difficult to just sort of up sticks and move to another work area.  Because there’s an established team there and effectively you’re, you know, invading their space.  But my perception is that some floors are cooler than others and that this floor in particular is very hot because there’s more people on it more of the time and it feels like we have less space so you just naturally get more heat created.
A:	That’s interesting, so the sort of density of people varies across the floors?
B:	Yes it does. I mean I think that you know the carrying capacity of each floor is set by health and safety rules but certainly on some floors there’s more space than others and this one feels particularly packed.  
A:	Right OK.  I mean just quickly would you be able to tell me sort of, is it in terms of I suppose your perceived density, which floors feel the most and least overcrowded?
B:	The middle ones feel most crowded, that would be the third and fourth. And then there ones at the extremities, the first and the seventh feel less crowded.
A:	That’s interesting.  So why are there less people on the first and seventh floors, that’s interesting.
B:	I’m not sure that there’s fewer people, I think the number of people may be determined by their number of facilities available. So there’s a limit to the number of people can be put on a particular floor.  But there just feels to me that there’s more desk space available on the first floor than there is on the fourth, more space around people if you see what I mean, may be not fewer people but more space around them.
A:	Yes OK.  And I suppose to other people on your floor and I suppose on some other floors aswell share your sense of discomfort on occasion?
B:	It varies.  So yes some people do and complain about that and I guess a lot of other people don’t or don’t seem to.  
A:	OK.  And when you were in the previous building before you moved into this one, the non air-conditioned one, thinking about, you were saying there was less people in that one and I wondered if you could again just sort of go through which floors, how many fewer people there were you think and over which floors there were less people on and may be why there was less people?
B:	Do you mean in the other building, the one next door?
A:	Yes the non air-conditioned one.
B:	Yes in the building next door we didn’t have an open-plan set up.  So at that time there were a number of separate offices, all of which were joined by a sort of corridor around the floor.  So as you walked around the floor you would sort of peer into lots of separate offices, which would have usually between [removed] and 5 may be 10 at the most people in them.  So in each of those office spaces each would have it’s own windows and the people in it could you know use the blinds and open windows to get to the point where they were comfortable.  There were fewer people in it, I think that’s because there were fewer desk space available, open plan being a bit more efficient in terms of the number of desks you can get in. But also they were fixed desks so at any time at least you know [removed]0% of them would be free because people just weren’t in the office.  
A:	Right OK.  So where, they were off doing other things were they presumably?
B:	Yes some people would be on trips; perhaps to Brussels because we were doing a lot of Brussels work.  Other people would be off on leave or off due to illness or possibly working from home because we were also you know, as in both places working flexibly.  
A:	Yes.  And you were saying in that building when you got too hot you just opened the windows.  I mean you can’t do that in the building that you’re in at the moment?
B:	We can in the morning before the air-conditioning kicks in and we can in the evening after it’s switched off but not during the daytime because if we have windows open during the daytime whilst the air-conditioning is one we’re effectively trying to air-condition the street, which isn’t good.
A:	OK that’s really interesting.  So the way you cool yourself down changes between outside of working hours?
B:	Yes.
A:	And do you find, I mean you were saying that your working times have changed but are you ever in the office sort of after the air-conditioning has been turned off or before it’s turned on and how does what you do to cool yourself down differ then?  Do you still open the windows or?
B:	Yes I’m usually in at 8, which is before the air-conditioning comes on so if it’s particularly warm in here I will open a window.  And then I think it goes off around 5ish, 5.30, so again that would be a time when we’d probably open a window.  
A:	Right OK.  So I mean do you find that you’re more comfortable when the air-conditioning is on or off, when you have to cool yourself down with the windows?
B:	Well when it works I think it works quite effectively so I would say I’m more comfortable with the air-conditioning on.
A:	Right OK that’s really interesting OK.  And I mean thinking about your I suppose history of working I suppose a little bit how often have you worked in buildings with air-conditioning?  I mean if you can think back, a memory exercise this time.
B:	Well I’ve worked in air-conditioned buildings possibly about half the time of my working life, which is oh lord, twenty odd years.  So in office buildings in the UK, also in office buildings in [removed] and I’ve also worked in non air-conditioned work places.  I used to teach in a [removed] school and we didn’t have air-conditioning there and also some of the offices that I’ve worked in since then have been non air-conditioned aswell.  So probably about half and half over that time.
A:	OK. And in your experience, I mean would you, again how would you have kept yourself comfortable for example when you were working in unconditioned buildings? Would you have been dressed differently on those occasions?  So as you’ve moved through your career has the sort of the way you dressed changed aswell?  Or have you always been wearing suits?
B:	No I’ve worn different things; it really sort of depends on the working environment. So in a school a suit isn’t really appropriate, it’s a bit too formal and not particularly comfortable.  So I wouldn’t wear something like that, I would wear something more casual but still reasonably smart.  So like trousers and a shirt.  But working in [removed] or working in a private language school where you know your clients expect you to be dressed in a certain way you’ve got fewer options really. 
A:	Right OK. I suppose I mean have you, thinking back again, I mean possibly not something you were thinking about at the time but I mean were there any particularly uncomfortable buildings or particularly comfortable buildings that you remember working in?
B:	Well schools can be quite uncomfortable because generally you don’t have; I mean you’ve got some control over the temperature in the summer because you can open windows.  But if you’ve got quite big glass windows and no shades then when the sun comes round and comes into your classroom it can turn it into a furnace.  So that is often a problem in summer. 
A:	Right OK, OK.  That’s interesting.  
B:	Actually I mean this building used to be quite a comfortable place to work, it was really only after they made a change to try to use the air-conditioning less in order to reduce electricity use that it really became you know noticeably an issue.
A:	That’s interesting. So when did they do that and what sort of changes did they make?
B:	That’s about two years ago.  It’s a bit difficult to say without knowledge of how the building works, that’s probably the people in Building Services that you’d need to talk to to find out exactly what they’ve done.  They’ve done quite a lot of things to try to make the building more efficient but certainly looking at the air-conditioning was one of the things they’ve tried to do.  I do understand that it runs from something like 9 or 9.30 till 5.30 and it’s also turned off for short periods during the day, sort of half an hour, to try and cut down on the amount that it’s used.
A:	Yes OK.  And so you feel more uncomfortable more often after they’ve made these changes?
B:	Yes.
A:	OK.  And you were saying that I mean you dress, sorry just thinking about your clothing, you said you can change your clothing to a certain extent but I mean I suppose what would be the problem with dressing so differently?   I mean what I’m trying to get at is why you feel you need to wear a suit and to a certain extent be a little bit uncomfortable?  What would be the expectation or the reason there, why you wear a suit essentially?  I’m not articulate in my question.
B:	That’s a very good question.  Well I think there are a couple of things, one is sort of expectation that there’s a certain manner of dress that’s associated with the kind of work that we do.  So it’s part of your professional attire, that that’s the way that you would dress and I think that that’s not just a simple expectation; I think there’s also reasons for that as well, although it’s not the case in my role currently.  We do meet with people from the private sector frequently, so we meet with people from energy companies, banks, the investment world, other professions and in those sort of meetings people would be coming to those meeting formally dressed and we kind of match their style.  So if for example it would be more comfortable on a particularly hot day for me to come to work in shorts and sandals and a loose t-shirt it wouldn’t really be appropriate for me to wear that then go into a meeting with someone whose come across town and is wearing a suit and tie.
A:	Right OK.  How, thinking about again in your sort of working career, how long do you feel you’ve been working to those expectations, I mean in terms of the different roles?  So presumably you know when you were working in the school there was a different set of expectations as you said.  But has it always been this way since you’ve been working in [removed] or?
B:	Yes I would say so, so that’s at least the last nine years.
A:	OK.  I suppose if you, so what other situations in your daily life at the moment do you come across air-conditioning; do you have it at home?
B:	No we don’t. So really just in shops I suppose and restaurants.
A:	OK.  Do you sort of feel that your workplace should be air-conditioned or would you be happy it wasn’t air-conditioned?
B:	I think it should be.
A:	It should be?
B:	Yes.
A:	Why is that?
B:	Well I think that it’s more comfortable, I think that it allows us to be more productive and to concentrate on the job of work that we need to do rather than adjusting our comfort level.  Especially as there are some constraints on how we can adjust our clothing in order to deal with fluctuations in temperature.  
A:	OK. I mean, so do you feel that, I mean thinking more broadly, all workplaces should be air-conditioned or just some types of workplaces or?
B:	I think it depends on the workplace really.
A:	In what way?
B:	Well if you imagine, say a foundry compared to the office environment, the foundries will produce a hell of a lot of heat, that’s part of the working environment and people adjust to it in a number of ways.  So to attempt to you know cool it artificially in order to help people to work would seem to be self-defeating.  But that’s not the kind of work that we’re doing. So the kind of work that we’re doing requires a lot of concentration and attention to detail and you need to avoid as many distractions as possible sometimes in order to accomplish that.  If you are continually thinking about whether you’re comfortable or not comfortable that can be quite a drain on your ability to do your work, that’s what I found anyway.
A:	OK.  I mean that’s really interesting.  Do you think that would be a more widely accepted opinion amongst the people you work with in the team?
B:	I don’t know really.
A:	Right OK.
B:	I mean a lot of people will be concerned about air-conditioning from other points of view such as the amount of energy it uses and therefore it’s impact on our energy emissions and you know ultimately impact on climate change.  And I think also some people feel that air-conditioning is unhealthy for a variety of reasons. They are worried about sort of germs for example.  For me those are secondary to feeling comfortable and being able to get my job done.
A:	Yes.  So if you were, so for example, going into another office environment or a different office environment to meet somebody would you expect that it was air-conditioned?
B:	Not necessarily, I’d expect that it was comfortable.  So I wouldn’t expect to go into, you know to meet an external stakeholder, to go to one of the energy companies for example and go to their offices and find that it was 27 degrees because I think the expectations on both sides would be that we’d be dressed in a certain way and that would require some control over the temperature. 
A:	Yes OK. And so if you did turn up at somebody else’s office and it was say 27 degrees what would be your thought really, I mean what would be your impression?
B:	It would be quite negative, I’d think it was pretty inconsiderate and you know wonder if there was a problem you know, for example, the air-conditioning was broke or there was some other reason why it was at that temperature.
A:	Right OK.  And, sorry two seconds.  OK so I suppose I’m sort of coming to the end of the questions, I’m aware that I don’t want to keep you for too long but I really have for you and I was just wondering I mean are there any other sort of aspects in the air-conditioned environment that I haven’t asked you about that you can think of that you’d like to talk about?
B:	I’m trying to think.  Well I suppose I tended to, the problems that I tended to experience in the workplace are ones where the temperature has been uncomfortably high for me and then it’s a struggle to keep cool you know with the constraints that we have on, what you can and cannot work for the office.  I mean from the other side there are some of my colleagues who find the air-conditioning to be too cold so they kind of the opposite problem of trying to keep warm.
A:	And do they dress in the same way that you do?
B:	Yes similarly.  So that is the case of trying to find things that you can put on, sweaters and so on to keep warm. 
A:	OK.  And one thing that puts the timeline is the issue of sweat and whether you feel it’s appropriate, do you sweat at work and do you feel that that would be a problem if that happened?  Or would that be perfectly OK to be a bit sweaty?
B:	Well I guess it’s something that can’t be helped.  I mean the times when I’ve been uncomfortable in the office then yes that’s been an issue for me and it’s something that you try and deal with, with a handkerchief or something to mop your brow if you’re feeling quite sweaty.  But it’s uncomfortable and unpleasant.  
A:	Yes, yes.  So that’s interesting, so you would rather not sweat if possible?
B:	Definitely not because again I found personally that if that’s the way, if I’m hot and sweaty when I’m sat at my desk not moving then that indicates that things are really way too hot and then if I’m trying to focus on a piece of work, a piece of writing, it’s quite difficult to do that. 
A:	Right OK.  And what do you think; I mean do you think other people would have an impression of you if you were to have been sweaty?
B:	I think there is that but for me that’s secondary because if you know that would be something that everyone’s experiencing so people kind of understand that if some people are feeling a bit hot and sweaty, if everyone’s in the same boat.
A:	Yes OK.  And I must just ask you one last question, which is about, earlier at the beginning of the interview you sort of talked about you now come into your workplace much earlier than you used to and I was wondering what sort of underpins that?  Is it a change in job role or is it the air-conditioning system or sort of, why is it really?
B:	That was really just due to a change in job role so I moved from one particular work area to another on promotion and I decided to make a change to come in early so that I could really in a sense steal a march on the day and tackle things in the quieter period in the morning when I think I’m more productive than later on.  So it wasn’t really connected with the air-conditioning and you know keeping cool in the office. 
A:	And I mean do you find that it’s something that crosses your mind, do you think about it at all, you know, I don’t want to go in early because the air-conditioning won’t be on till nine o’clock or is that not something that really is an issue?
B:	No that hasn’t been an issue because generally over the course of the last year it’s not that bad in the morning and we’ve got the option to open the windows and cool things down a bit. It does affect me later in the day, sort of after 5.30, after 6, I don’t really want to be around the office because then I find it gets uncomfortably hot. 
A:	Yes that’s really interesting.  So do you find that even when you open a window after 5.30 that …
B:	It doesn’t seem to help as much.  Maybe there’s sort of more heat trapped in the city after the course of the day, more heat traps in buildings so the outside air just feels, it doesn’t really cool the building down as much as it does in the morning.
A:	So at that point you go home?
B:	Yes.
A:	Right OK.  And do you prefer, if you had work to do and to keep going and wanted to do work would you prefer to go home and do it from home?
B:	No, no I would do it the following day unless it was something that absolutely had to be done that day.
A:	Right OK.  So do you find that I mean obviously part of it is the job role but you come in early so that you , rather than stay late.
B:	Yes that’s my preference.
A:	And is that connected to the air-conditioning being turned off at 5.30?
B:	Not really no.
A:	It’s just a preference.
B:	Yes.
A:	Right OK.  Yes, I’m aware that you are a busy man and I should let you go. So thank you very very much for talking to me [removed] that’s absolutely great, it’s been really informative.
B:	You’re welcome.