IV26
A	Interviewer – 	Sam
B	Interviewee

A	OK, that’s on.  OK probably the best place to start is just a bit about yourself.
B:	OK
A:	In terms of how long have you been manager here at this hotel and working in the hotel industry?
B:	OK. I’ve been Manager at the hotel for just over four months.  Prior to that I’ve not had any hotel experience but I’ve worked for [removed], which is the same company within the restaurants on and off for eleven years so, so I’ve been around the hotels and been around.
A:	OK and the restaurants are linked to the hotels?
B:	They are yes.
A:	Right OK, OK, fantastic.  OK then, so let’s talk about his particular hotel and particularly how it’s cooled, air conditioning or lack of.  So how do you on an every day basis find the hotel, in terms of the climate inside?
B:	The reception area is very very warm; we have two refrigerated, well one freezer and one refrigerated, what they called, with the drinks and ice.
A:	Oh chillers.
B:	Yes.  That are in the reception area that obviously generate heat so it can get quite warm within the reception area and everyone notices that especially from coming outside this time of year.  Within the rooms we have the heating controls on the wall.  We don’t have the air conditioning but when the housekeepers go into a room in the morning the first thing they do is open the windows. So if the rooms are like stuff because people have had the heating turned up it will cool the rooms down. And then what we do throughout the day during the sort of cooler months, the winter months, is when the rooms are checked make sure the windows are closed and put the heating onto 18 so it’s like what you class as room temperature to try and maintain sort of the temperature within the rooms.  Through the summer we work it the opposite way round.  The housekeepers will go in; open the windows, but then the windows would remain open until the guests actually check in and decide whether they want to close them themselves to try and circulate the air.  And we will turn the heating system down to 10 degrees.  So unless it drops below 10 degrees no heating will come on.
A:	OK that’s really interesting. And when do you decide to make the transition?
B:	It literally depends on the weather, it is purely weather driven because we can, as you are probably aware our climate is very, very varied so it can be a case of, we can get a warm spell in April and we’ll start doing it in April and then come May it can be snowing.  So we’ll not do it and then it will pick up again in July so then we’ll start doing it.  So it literally, the girls when they are cleaning the rooms, you generally get a feel of how warm the rooms are getting and we also have like the desk fans in the rooms, which all they do is generally circulate the air that’s in the room, they don’t offer any sort of cold air but it helps circulate the air.
A:	OK fantastic.  So during the summer months do you find that that’s a pretty much affective way of keeping the hotel cool or do you find that….?
B:	It depends on how many guests are in a room. If it’s only a single occupancy in a room, because all our rooms are the same, all our rooms theoretically can sleep up to four people plus a baby in a cot.  So if there’s only a single occupancy you find that the heat that’s generated in the room is not as bad but if you’ve got a family of four in a room on a hot summers night and there’s no air outside, even with the windows open, that room is going to get very warm, very stuffy, when you’ve got mum and dad in the double bed and two kids in two single beds all in one confined, even though they are quite spacious rooms, it’s still a confined space for four people.  And it does get very hot and very sticky.
A:	It does get very hot and I suppose in that sense do you get complaints?
B:	We do, yes, and they’ll come and they’ll say and you know we get comments put on different sites, trip adviser, booking.com have their own review site aswell and then plus ours that we send out to anyone who gives us an email address to give us feedback.  And we put “what could we do better?”  And they’ll put on there, “have air conditioning installed” or “get better air conditioning”.  And we’re like “we don’t have air conditioning how can we get better”.  And things like that, so it’s, you know.
A:	Yes, absolutely.  And do you do anything else to help adjust the, or make things more comfortable?  For example do you change the bedding or anything like that?
B:	We don’t change the bedding.  Every day of the year we still make our beds up with a duvet but we will offer, as the guests are checking in, we’ll inform them that if they do find it a bit warm and they just want a sheet that they can come back to reception. We’ve always got a supply of extra sheets so they can have like just a sheet and that to put over them. So they are not having to have a big duvet on them.
A:	Sure, yes.  And how often do people do that?  Is it actually quite rare or do people do it regularly during the summer?
B:	We do get quite a few of our regular users that will sort of phone up before they’ve even checked in and say, “it’s been a bit warm over the weekend, is there any chance I can have a spare sheet just in case it’s a bit warm?”  So we do get our regular users that do that, I mean we’ve got some of our guests that have been coming for over eight years so they know.
A:	That’s very interesting.  So you would say you have regular users?
B:	Yes.
A:	What would be the other distinction, non-regular users or?
B:	Well I mean regular users as a very loose term.  I mean regular users for me is somebody who may come once a year every year and they come for the same thing every year.  They may come because they are stopping off here before they go over to the Isle of Man for the TT races, things like that. To me they are regulars even though we see them only once a year.  Other people who I class as regulars are contractors who stay in our hotel for six months and they are going to be every night for four nights a week for the next six months, twelve months.  We’ve got one guy who’s been here for the last two years and he’s just had his contract extended another six months.  He spends four nights a week with us.  
A:	Right, OK so you know him well.
B:	We know him well. So he has the same room every week.
A:	Right.  And how do the regular users handle the heat differently to may be people that turn up and they’ve never stayed in the hotel before?
B:	The regular users they’ll come and they’ll talk to us.  They’ll just like come and they’ll say, the majority of them, because they know the hotel, will automatically ask for a quiet side.  Because obviously you’ve got the car park side and then you’ve got the roadside. So if they are on the car park side and it is warm they know they can leave the window open overnight and not going to get too much disturbance.  Whereas if you are on the car park side, because of the road noise that we used to get, we’ve had triple glazing put in.  So you’ve got three layers of glass so opening the windows, you can open the windows, but then you’ve obviously got noise from the road and it’s do you want the heat or do you want the noise?  I mean we do have in some of the rooms what we call an airflow system, a great big unit on the wall, it’s like an acoustic and basically it just draws the air in from outside and generates so you don’t have to open the window.  So you don’t get the road noise coming in but once you’ve got the fan on that turned up to like generate the air coming through it can be quite noisy again.  So it’s one of those, it’s sort of like what’s the best of the worst situation so to speak?
A:	Absolutely.  And again do you get, I mean do you find that people will make complaints about the noise?
B:	Yes.
A:	Right OK, so they come down and make comments?
B:	Yes they come, I mean a lot of people think that it is an air conditioning unit with the size of it and everything because it blows air out and they’ll be like, “that air conditioning unit is really noisy”.  And we’re like, “we don’t have an air conditioning unit, we don’t have air conditioning in the hotel”.  
A:	OK.  I mean, so the regular people, regulars, they know you better and will feel free to come to talk to you but non-regulars don’t feel the same?
B:	I don’t think it’s that they don’t feel the same, I think it’s just they don’t know what to expect, they don’t know whether we’ve got air conditioning or not unless they’ve gone through and read all the write up about everything on the website when they’ve booked.  Because it doesn’t tell you there and then on the actual webpage until you click in to see the facilities.  But it doesn’t say that we don’t have air conditioning, it’s just not there. So unless you’ve been onto one of the hotels that has air conditioning and you see that it says it until you actually arrive and get in the room you don’t know.  We do put notices up on the reception desk, depending on the time of year, to let people know that we have like a warm weather one to say that there are fans in your rooms but should you need an additional fan come back to reception, we do have spares.  On that aswell it also says about if you want like a duvet, if the duvet is too much, come back and we’ve got sheets and things aswell.  So we do put those up but how many people actually read, they are more concerned about getting checked in and we have that much information to tell them, they don’t really want us going, “and we’ve got this notice here telling you”.  So it’s how much information they actually take in at the time. And then in the cold weather again it’s the same. If we know that it’s a really cold day we’ll make sure we go into the rooms and knock the temperature up just a little bit more, just to make sure the rooms are that bit warmer, so that the guests will warm and thaw out when they arrive, rather than sort of going in their rooms and sat there for like ten, fifteen minutes while the room is heating up.
A:	Absolutely yes.  Do you find generally I suppose that people arrive maybe not having read any website or expecting air conditioning and they are not finding it?
B:	Yes.
A:	So you would say that’s the case?
B:	Yes you do get a lot of people that actually expect because they’ll have stayed at other sites that have air conditioning and they think that because one’s got it we’ve all got it.  And that’s not the case. More of our hotels further south have air conditioning because temperatures are that bit warmer for the south but if you go up to like Scotland you wouldn’t expect a [removed] or most hotels within Scotland to have air conditioning. But yet some of the newer builds do.    
A:	That’s really interesting.
B:	They do get and like guests do sort of look at it and think we are going to have air conditioning.
A:	Is that enough, the discovery of not having air conditioning, is that enough sometimes to make people say, “well actually I’m going to stay somewhere else”.  Or do people arrive and say, they have their visit and then they complain or something like that? How does it usually work for them?
B:	I’ve never had it where anybody sort of arrived, found out we’ve not got air conditioning and then left to go and stay somewhere else.  But we have had it where guests have arrived, it’s the first time they’ve come and stayed at our hotel, and they had a very warm night, had no air conditioning and then they sort of like said, “Oh I won’t be coming back again, I’ll look elsewhere in future”.  So we have had that but not where they’ve sort of like not stayed on their actual visit that they’ve turned up for.  
A:	OK.  And what’s the hotel like to work in as a building?   So what, in terms of your movements around the building what’s your routine, do you have a routine every day?
B:	At the moment my routine is sort of all over the place because I mean the prime example yesterday I was on reception for the first few hours of my shift.  Then I was in a meeting for two hours, then I was checking rooms, so I was around all the rooms in the hotel.  And then I was back in my office for an hour and a half and then I was over in the restaurant. So my days are very, very different. I mean today again my shift started at twelve o’clock, I’ve come in and I’ve been in and out of the rooms for about an hour, an hour and a half. Then I caught up with some bits and pieces in my office, then had my break and then I’m over in the restaurant and then I’m actually on reception from five o’clock.  So my days are very, very varied but I am in and around all the building throughout each day that I am in.  On a day-to-day basis I come in and I do what I call the guest walk.  So I’ll like, when I turn up I will come in and sort of come to the front door and then sort of look and like, try and look at it rather than from the manager’s eyes, look at it from the guest and it’s like what am I seeing?  Whereas when I first walk in in a morning my eyes are sort of like, yes, that’s right, that’s right, that’s right and then after half an hour when I know things are as it should be I will then walk out and walk in and like what am I seeing as a guest?  A guest is not bothered whether that’s the right POS that you’ve got there, a guest is not bothered you know about whether the chair is in the right place.  What a guest is bothered about is how does it look, is it warm, is it welcoming and that covers you know everything from if the reception team, they can get very very warm behind there.  If they’re not adequately cold they can become irritable and as guests come in and make some comment, it’s like, yes tell us about it, and it’s not sort of what you want.  So it is about finding that …
A:	So how do you manage that situation in the reception area?
B:	Over the summer months we end up with fans under the desk, fans, I think last summer we ended up with four fans, one under each of the desk areas and then one sat on the floor by the doorway. And then one that the guests could see on top of the CCTV monitor to try and keep the team cool.
A:	Did that work?
B:	To a certain extent, but what we are looking at doing, because we know a lot of the heat is generated, I mean there’s a heater in the reception area that is never switched on, not even in the winter months. This is how warm it gets in there, as cold as it has been, the window in the reception area on a daytime is always open just to keep an airflow coming in because it does get very very warm.  
A:	Sure.  And how far can you open the windows? I mean can you open them all the way or…?
B:	No there’s window restrictors on every window so they will literally open this far, even on the ground floor.  It’s one of the safety precautions that the hotel has through incidents that have happened within [removed] and other hotels from people falling from windows and stuff.  So every window throughout the whole of the hotel will only open a maximum of, I think it’s four inches.
A:	Is that just policy in this hotel?
B:	It’s policy yes.
A:	Or is there is a broader sort of regulatory health and safety?
B:	It’s throughout the whole of [removed], we have a window restrictor policy, we have a document that we have to go round and check all the window restrictors every week and it gets signed off myself or the manager at each hotel. 
A:	Sure. And are there places within, we’ve got the reception area that can get quite warm, are there other places in the building that could get quite warm?
B:	The other places are the corridors because in the old block, which is the section this side, we originally just had the first block and then we’ve had an extension built on.  So in the old block the corridors are just one long corridor, they’ve got a fire door in the middle of them and a fire door at the end to connect onto the extension.  And then there’s a window of this wall here but there’s no windows that actually open. So it’s just like a sheet of sold windows, no opening windows and it’s just a greenhouse effect.  So what we were playing with in September, because it was quite a warm September, which is when I first went over there, was during the day, in the morning when the housekeepers came in they went and they actually closed the curtains, because the lights are on all day anyway.  But they actually closed the curtains to stop the heat building up through the window.  And it made a big difference having the curtains drawn and then obviously as we sort of got to like tea time and it was starting to cool down we’d go round and we’d open them all again and have the natural light coming back through.  But in the extension we actually had windows that open, they are only little windows, but there’s three windows on each floor and they’ve got two windows that open. So we have those open, which then circulates the air on that end.
A:	So you find there’s less of a problem with overheating in the extension?
B:	And we also find that the rooms stay cooler on that end and as to whether that’s because you’ve not got the generation of heat in the corridor.  The old block you’ve got a room and a room and a corridor down the middle of the rooms, rooms either side, whereas in the extension you’ve got the rooms down this side and then the corridor, which goes, looks over the car park, so it’s not double-sided. So again with the corridor generating that much heat from the windows down this end and heat circulating down there you’ve got nowhere for the heat to go apart from into the rooms.  So we find that the rooms in the extension, even on really hot nights, are cooler than the ones that are in the main block.
A:	Sure.  Right and this is probably a really good time to sort of get into a bit more detail about the building itself.  So I mean how much insulation is there, is the hotel insulated?
B:	Yes the loft is fully insulated.
A:	OK.  Is there wall insulation aswell?
B:	As far as I’m aware everything was insulated when the building was first done. 
A:	When was it built?
B:	It was built in 2003.
A:	Right OK.
B:	So it’s nine years old this time.
A:	Nine years old this time. And when was the extension built?
B:	The extension was done four years ago this year. 
A:	Right OK.  And was that made with the same materials?
B:	Yes.
A:	So what is it made of, is it brick?
B:	Yes brick.
A:	Brick, what are the internal walls, is it just plasterboard and wooden doors?
B:	Yes.
A:	OK fantastic.  I was going to say something about the floors, is there insulation in each floor or is it just in the top of the building?
B:	Each, when they build the [removed] and for a fire sort of safety thing each room, basically if a fire starts in a room theoretically it should be contained within a room and that’s how they build them. So then theoretically it shouldn’t go on unless it’s obviously left longer than anyone anticipates. So each room is sort of basically self-contained.  I’m not a builder but I’m assuming there must be something between each room that is…
A:	Fire block.
B:	Yes, which again would put some sort of insulation between each room.
A:	Sure, sure.  The heating system, so what sort of heating system, is it a big oil system I presume or?
B:	The heating system, electric heaters that are on the wall and they are powered by a little control panel.
A:	So they are all independently…
B:	Yes they all run independently, they’re not connected up all together; they’re not run via like boilers or anything.  All the boilers that we have is just purely for the water, the showers and the bathrooms and stuff.  The heaters in each room are just purely, each room has it’s own heating system that’s not connected to any other one, the same with all the ones within the corridors, they are all independently done.
A:	Sure. And how are they controlled those heating systems. So there’s a panel on each heater.
B:	There’s a panel on the heaters and the panels on the same part of the wall in every wall, but the heaters are in different places depending on whether it’s a standard room or whether it’s a disabled room. The heaters can be slightly different places but in a standard room basically you’ve got wall panel, as you walk in and come past the bathroom and the heater is on the far wall next to the window.  It’s just up and down, the temperature control and there’s another button that tells you the actual temperature in the room.
A:	So the temperatures are set or adjusted each morning by the staff?
B:	Well it automatically shuts itself and then we readjust it depending on the time of year.  But they automatically shut themselves down, I think it’s ten o’clock in the morning, it’s either eight or ten o’clock in the morning they automatically reset themselves.
A:	OK, so there’s no controlling computer to it, it’s just built into each radiator?
B:	Yes each heater, each control panel just is automatically there.
A:	So it resets the temperature to…?
B:	It resets, now I can never remember whether it automatically resets it to 18 or it automatically resets it to 10. I’ve got a feeling it automatically resets it to 10 because we always leave a notice and that and this is why we then change them. I’m sure it resets itself to 10 and our business guests nine times out of ten at eight o’clock in the morning have already departed.  And our leisure guests at that time in the morning are usually still in bed and don’t feel the temperature anyway.  And depending on the time of year you just don’t want it at 18 degrees in the room when it’s boiling outside.  You’re quite for it to like be no…
A:	Your business and leisure guests, do they have different expectations about how hot or cool it should be or would you say there’s no distinction there really?
B:	I wouldn’t say there’s really a distinction, the main distinction is that the majority, well as I say majority, it’s probably fifty fifty of our business guests are single occupiers.  So there’s only themselves in the room so obviously again the heat generation isn’t the same.  But then the other fifty percent you’ll get where it’s a twin room.  So you’ve got two big burly contractors who have been working doing whatever sweaty job they do all day, then they’ll come back, have showers and such.  It’s like you know the heat that can be generated I would sort of imagine would be quite considerable compared to the single occupier you know, businessman who sits at his desk at night.  And I mean I know we get the business, what I class as businessmen, it sounds awful to sort of distinct between the two, but you’ve got businessmen who I would say was more like your shirts and that, who will come in and they’ll come back from work and within half an hour are back down in the bar and having their evening meal and stuff.  Whereas the contractors might take forty five minutes and you can see and you know that they’ve showered and everything, complete you know…
A:	An overall.
B:	Yes because they’ve been doing whatever all day so again it’s like you know if you’ve got two of them in there it could be an hour. And then it’s like the shower has been on so the amount of warmth that’s generated from the shower as well as everything else, it makes a big difference.  But like I say the leisure guests, it all depends on what they’ve been doing, how many of them there are.  If it’s just a couple that are staying you know, it’s not going to be much different to staying at home.  Even on a really hot night what are you going to do differently at home to cool the bedroom down to what you would do in a bedroom in a hotel.
A:	Sure, yes.  So do you find that you get, there’s a difference in may be complaints or comments or expectations between those two categories? People who use the shower more when they come back, may be they would be prefer to have cooling systems or do you find that that’s not really the case?
B:	No not, no not something that’s really sort of.
A:	There’s no sort of, in your experience, sort of category of people that tends to complain more about not having cooling?
B:	No, and sort of looking at moreso when we get you know, when we do have the extreme weather, are few and far between, or when it’s like a really close night.  You can normally tell when you’re going to get people complaining about it being too warm in the rooms because you know yourself how close it is outside.  And the temperature just doesn’t drop enough so it doesn’t allow the hotel to cool down aswell.  And again the hot rooms, you do tend to find that it is probably more our leisure guests rather than our business guests that make more complaints about it.  And I think purely that it is that they’ve got a family in a room so there’s more people, so there’s more heat generated.  Like we’ve gone away to stay in a hotel where they’ve not got air conditioning, don’t all hotels I know is one of the questions I’ve had thrown at me when I first sort of went over to [removed] is like “don’t all hotels nowadays have air conditioning?” And it’s like, “no not all hotels do have air conditioning”. 
A:	So do you find that’s a very common expectation that all hotels have air conditioning?
B:	I mean me personally it’s, I don’t, even when I go abroad I don’t very rarely use the air conditioning unless I feel it’s like you know the need to.  And I think the only time I’ve really sort of felt the need to it was 38 degrees.
A:	Absolutely yes.
B:	It’s not, but it is like you say, it’s an expectation that a lot of people I think nowadays have just come to.  It’s like you go wherever and you get air conditioning.
A:	Absolutely yes. I mean you were saying earlier about a lot of hotels within the [removed] group do have air conditioning.  Which hotels do they tend to be or is there a, you were saying may be it’s ones that are further south?
B:	There’s a lot more with air conditioning further south.  The newer builds tend to have it moreso.
A:	So when you say newer builds how long ago would you say?
B:	Probably anything sort of like within the last three to four years, that sort of timescale.  And like your sort of big ones, we’ve got a lot of like [removed] ones, sorry a [removed] is one that doesn’t like have a restaurant attached to it, the restaurant is actually inside the [removed].  And they are normally like a big tower building, we’ve got quite a few in Manchester, Manchester Airport is a [removed] one, they have air conditioning.  But they’re a lot bigger and like big tower blocks of flats and things.  A lot of the ones in London and your big cities and stuff will have air conditioning.  A lot of the reasons behind why they have air conditioning is one because they are big tall block units, windows don’t open, one because of the noise at Manchester Airport.  You don’t want to be opening the window when you’re only like half a mile from Manchester Airport. So they’ll have air conditioning and that’s why when they were built they were put with the air conditioning because they weren’t built to open windows.  They’re not built for like I say, Manchester Airport is a prime example, people don’t stay for more than one night at Manchester Airport really unless they’re there as a contractor. Most people go and stay at Manchester Airport or the one at Stanstead or Heathrow or Gatwick and places like that, they go and stay purely because they are getting a flight the next day or they’ve just come back off holiday and they are staying before they drive home. They are there for one night, they don’t want to be disturbed throughout the night from planes and the air conditioning gives them that option, not having to have the windows open.  Again a lot of the ones like further south, I know there’s a couple that I’ve stayed in around Cornwall and Devon area, the ones down there tend to have air conditioning.  But the temperatures that they have down there compared to what sort of temperatures we get up here, yes it’s only like two or three degrees variance, but that two or three degrees we think how hot it gets up here when it does get hot, that two or three degrees extra down there makes a big difference.   
A:	Are they still building [removed] without air conditioning?
B:	Without air conditioning, I’m not sure.  
A:	Would it be your expectation that all new buildings would have air conditioning now or?
B:	No. I say no just purely for the climate change that [removed] are trying to go in. They are trying to sort of go down the eco friendly, be green sort of path and the sort of presence of air conditioning doesn’t sort of portray that and that for me it’s a case of if you’ve got air conditioning in a hotel that automatically kicks in at a certain time then you’ve got to actually you know, physically get up and change it then that’s not.
A:	What sort of policies are associated with that sort of drive to be green? Is there anything solid like with a policy document about how you need to do this at hotel level or is it more at the central office level?
B:	It’s more of a case, things that they’ve like done is we’ve gone completely sort of full recycling system, we have separate things for food waste, general waste, glass waste and there’s that many different coloured bins for different things within the kitchen area and the back yard area we have our recycling bins for anything that comes out of the, waste that come out of the rooms.  Things like when it comes to washing the linen, the towels and stuff. 
A:	Sure, does it affect the heating policy?
B:	Heating, it’s a case of, that’s basically left to site to deem what they feel would be you know sufficient for the guest.  So hence like we, and at the moment we’re going round and making sure our rooms are at 18 degrees because it’s a comfortable temperature so you’re not going to feel cold when you go in but you’re not going to walk in and be like, absolutely melting.  And it does maintain that temperature aswell.  We do it in the afternoon and it’s not done sort of like too early in the morning and stuff then that will maintain.  But there’s not sort of any policy as to what temperature we have to keep the rooms. I mean it’s like I go round and I check the radiators as I’m going round the corridors and if I feel that one of the corridors is a bit warm I’ll turn it down. I tend to have all the heaters in the corridors at this time of year at around 3, 4 so it’s probably about half the full temperature of what it could be.  And it just keeps the corridors nicely aired rather than sort of going cold and everything.  And until you go into like the back stairwell, which only like the team go through anyway, it’s not until you go in there that you actually feel the difference in the temperature, it really drops. So if we didn’t have that you’d definitely feel the cold walking down the corridors.  But there’s no policy or anything around it.
A:	I mean what sort of portion of budget does it take to heat a hotel like this?
B:	I honestly wouldn’t know because everything is done centrally through the company.  All we see is, we have what we call a win card and on that it shows us where we are on our energy levels.  And last year we had an absolutely fantastic year because it was the first year they’d brought in these energy levels.
A:	So what’s this system sorry?
B:	It’s called a win card and basically they use like traffic lights and you are either red, green or amber.  The aim is to be green on everything; you don’t want to be red and ideally you don’t want to be amber either, you want to be green. And last year our energy consumption, which covers everything from heating, gas, electric, water, everything, we were green throughout the whole year and we finished, I think it was like either 15.6 or 18.6% up on the year before.  So we actually made such an impact last year that this year we’ve really struggled against it because they then set our budget against what we did last year. But last year we’d never done it before so last year yes, we were going round going yes, we still do, we are going round, if we weren’t in the office we’d turn the light off, if we weren’t in the tea room we’d turn the light off, we’d turn the drinks machine off for the team at eleven o’clock at night and it wouldn’t get switched back on until the next morning.  So you were saving the energy overnight there.  Instead of just turning like the TV off at the button we were turning it off at the socket, things like that.  We switched all our lights to energy saving light bulbs so throughout the whole restaurant and hotel we use nothing but energy saving light bulbs, apart from the stupid fitting ones that we have that we can’t do anything about because they don’t do an energy saving one.  But where we can we use the energy saving ones. Within the hotel it was things like making sure the lights get turned off in the linen rooms, that the lights aren’t on excessively within the bedrooms when the housekeepers are in them.
A:	Do you find a lot of heat coming off the light bulbs, that’s something that causes heating in the hotel or not really?
B:	Not really no, I will let you have a look round one of the rooms but yes where the heats are you’ve got, in most rooms you’ve got one main light, which is towards the door and then you have two lamps.  In the old block you have a lamp either side of the bed and then two lamps above the desk.  In the new block you’ve got these types of lights, the spotlight ones that are above the bed and then two little reading lights.  And then again a table lamp with that same halogen whatever light bulbs and then the main light by the bathroom door. So there’s not a lot of light, I mean one of the complaints we do get, especially in the new rooms is that there is not enough light and that they are quite dark, which I can relate to because it’s the way the lights are set out.  They are quite dark in there so there’s not a lot of heat and the halogen lights, there’s no heat that actually generates off them anyway.
A:	You were saying that the electronic equipment in the reception area that generates the heat, is there any other equipment in the hotel area that also generates a lot of heat?
B:	You’ve got the lift, that we have a fan because if it overheats up in the actual lift room, if that room gets too warm then the lift can have a tendency to cut out.  So we have a fan, one of the desk fans that’s in there that’s just constantly there switched on twenty four because it saves the lift breaking down and then you’ve got, obviously with the plant room aswell where we’ve got all the water boilers, which is located on the second floor. Again that room is generally quite warm.
A:	OK and does that heat stay within the room or does it spread throughout?
B:	It stays within the room, there’s like extractors at the side of the building that like pulls that out. The main area that does sort of like generate the heat and that is the reception.  I mean you’ve got two computers, you’ve got the TV monitor for the CCTV and then you’ve got the two vending machines, that’s the word I was looking for, the vending machines. But what we are looking at doing with that is, because we want another vending machine so we can offer snacks and stuff as well as just the drinks and ice-cream, is we are actually looking at taking a partition wall out that’s sort of in the same area as where the two vending machines are now and in that, at the moment it’s what used to be the old telephone box, but there’s an actual window in there. So what we’ve said is we don’t want that window blocking up, we want that left, because that will hopefully draw some of the heat.  Because we are getting a bank of vending machines across the one wall with a window behind that’s left open, which will then obviously help encourage some heat to go through.
A:	A bit of circulation.
B:	Yes.
A:	The fan in your lift area sounds pretty ingenious. Was that like, so is like supposed to be there, is that impulsive?
B:	No that’s just something that we’ve come up with.
A:	Innovation?
B:	Yes because it was like what can we do?
A:	Was the lift cutting out?
B:	It’s been better, not last summer, the summer before it was every other day we were, somebody would get stuck in it because it would just stop.
A:	Do you know what sort of temperatures it was getting to up there?
B:	I’ve got no idea. We didn’t even realise that it was overheating at first, which was why it was causing it. It was only through another problem we were having with the lift that we actually found out and it was just one of the guys just commenting about it about it being really really warm in there.  And he said to us, “Do you have a lot of problems with the lift cutting out?” And we were like, “we have done in the past”.  And he said, “I’m not surprised it’s overheating”.  And we were like “OK what can we do to cool it down?”
A:	Right.  And since you’ve put the fan up there it’s worked?
B:	We’ve not had it cut out on anybody; we’ve had nobody stuck in the lift so it’s worked in that affect, so yes.  
A:	Brilliant.
B:	It’s just a constant fan that’s on now but if it means that, and I presume it will be cheaper than some of the other methods that they’d bring in and nice and kinder to the environment aswell.
A:	Absolutely yes.  I mean you were saying earlier that energy issues tend to be controlled quite centrally and obviously the design of hotels is done centrally. I’m trying to imagine the departments they’ve got centrally, how does it all work?
B:	Right well you have like the design department who would put together like this is the [removed] that we want to build, this is where we go and then they’ll put the planning permission forward.  Once it goes from there then you’ve got what they call a development team who will then go and say, “right this is what we want to want to put into this [removed], we’re going to make it”, all the ones that they are doing at the moment are called ID4’s. The rooms that we’ve got are all ID2 and ID3 so it’s just like progressive.
A:	It’s an evolution.
B:	Yes.  So they are like constantly changing the way that they lace up.  If you go to one [removed] to another not every room will look exactly the same.  Not even our rooms, the extension rooms to the old block rooms do not look the same.
 
A:	Right OK, sure.
B:	The bathroom layouts are different, the bedroom layouts are different but realistically the sizes of the rooms are the same.  But the wardrobe furniture that goes in there and things like that they will make different in each room and they will sort of like evolve it depending on what feedback they’ve had from guests.  Because our rooms, the sort of best way to describe it, the biggest sort of thing that most people notice when they go in is that old rooms, when you go into the bathroom you have like a shelving unit and then a big mirror, which is you know, it’s great, you’ve somewhere to put all your stuff.  But a lot of our guests only stay for one night so how much stuff are they actually going to be putting on all those shelves.  In the new extension block there’s no shelving, it’s just one massive mirror, which is great when you’re staying for a night out and there’s more than one of you can get in the mirror.  And you’ve got a massive mirror that’s not closed in so you can do and you see more and it brightens the room.  The bathrooms look so much bigger and they’re no bigger but they look bigger because you’ve got this massive mirror that’s like this big instead of one that’s this big.
A:	Sure, it makes a big difference.
B:	So you’ve got all like the design teams and everything that are sort of like looking at all of that down to the carpets, the bedroom furniture.  I mean we’re due to have new TVs put into all our rooms in the next six weeks.  At the moment we’ve got the old big box TVs.
A:	So you’re going to get flat screen jobbies?
B:	We’re going to get flat screens.  I’m not sort of sure how I feel about that because apparently we’re getting forty-inch flat screens in every room.
A:	Forty inch?
B:	Forty-inch, they sound like far too big.
A:	Yes, I mean do you think there are potential issues there for; they generate a lot of heat?
B:	You see I’m not sure.  From what I gather from sites that have sort of already had them, they are all wall mounted and they’ll have their brackets so you’re not sort of going to get sort of the set area.  The ones we have now just sit on the eve of the wardrobe or on the desks.
A:	Sure.  Do you think they will generate a lot of heat though; I don’t suppose you know until you get them?
B:	Yes that’s it.  Until we get them I don’t know. I know the ones that we have do generate quite a bit of heat anyway.  As to whether that …..
A:	So what you are saying is they listen to customer feedback and then they change the rooms currently.  
B:	Yes.
A:	At what point does the air conditioning get put into the building in terms of, is it at the stage where they’ve designed the building, presumably may be?
B:	Yes.  If we sort of put a case forward and that, for us to be able to get air conditioning installed I’m not saying that it wouldn’t happen but we would have to put a business case together as to why we needed it, which is what we had to do for the triple glazing on the roadside.  We had to put a business case together explaining the reasons why, we’d also have to put together a case of how much it’s already cost us in lost revenue from having to refund people from the invocations because we offer the good night guarantee. So if somebody stays and doesn’t have a good night sleep because the room was too hot they get their money back. So this is what we did for the triple glazing, we put the case together, how many actual complaints did we get about the road noise, how much it cost in revenue, how much is it going to cost us to put it in and they sort of weigh it all up.  I think it worked out that for what it cost us to actually have the triple glazing installed was a third of what it would cost us in a twelve-month period in invocations.  And that’s with like the business plan that was put together.  So if we sort of said no, we need air conditioning, so you have to justify it, they won’t just come and put it in.  As to whether they put it in like I say within all new builds I think it would just be purely be a case of it would depend on like location.  Somewhere like us that’s sort of not really surrounded by anything, I don’t think they’d put it in like a satellite but something in like a town centre, like the one at [removed] that’s in the town centre because obviously you’ve got the noise and everything from the local area that’s going to be generate.  You can’t sort of stop that sort of noise happening, they are going to be more inclined to put the air conditioning in.
A:	Sure. And what is the age range of the buildings within the [removed]? Is this relatively an old building having been built in 2003?
B:	No.
A:	This is not an old building?
B:	No.  Some of the buildings are a lot older than this. 
A:	OK.  And the older buildings, would any of them have air conditioning?
B:	Yes.
A:	They would?
B:	Yes.  I mean you’ve got, I’m just trying to think some of the older ones.
A:	So is it the case that they’ve been turned into [removed]?
B:	No.
A:	Are all [removed] Hotels are purpose built?
B:	The majority of them, yes.  We do have a, we bought, [removed] bought out [removed], it’s about six, seven years ago and we converted the old [removed] into [removed]. Now their layouts were different to ours but still now it’s an ongoing process.  All the rooms are now the same colour scheme and everything but not necessarily all the same layouts. I mean one of my favourite [removed] we used to go to was an old [removed] and the reason why I loved going to it is because we always ask for the same room because it is a massive room, and like I say, our rooms are all practically exactly the same size apart from our disabled rooms.  But this one is a massive room and you could easily, if you had, I mean we stayed in there, us and two of our children with us and you wouldn’t even realise that you’ve got the children in the same room because the room is that big. It’s up in an attic, it’s a fantastic room but again that’s been one that’s been converted into a [removed] from something else.  But that one wasn’t a very old building because I actually watched that being built when it was being built for [removed] so it had only been [removed] for two years.
A:	Did it have air conditioning?
B:	It doesn’t no, it doesn’t.
A:	So it’s not necessarily the age of the building.
B:	No.
A:	So some older buildings do have air conditioning?
B:	Yes, the Manchester Airport ones are older and they have air conditioning.
A:	So the urban locations?
B:	A lot of it is the location and like I say if you’ve got the city centre ones you’ll tend to find that they will have air conditioning because of the noise factor and windows and stuff.
A:	OK that’s really interesting, thank you very much.  So thinking about you now, in terms of your own personal comfort and your own expectations of air conditioning.  I mean do you experience air conditioning in other areas of your life when, if you don’t have any at work?
B:	We have it over this side in the restaurant.
A:	That’s interesting, so where do you have it in the restaurant?
B:	I don’t know why they have it in the restaurant.  I think it’s more because obviously it’s such a big building and such an open space within the restaurant and they use the air conditioning, it’s used to both heat up and cool down and it’s all done, it’s the most useless piece of …..
 
A:	We’ll move on from that.  Do all the restaurants have air conditioning?
B:	Yes.  Not all of the hotels but all of the restaurants have.
A:	All the restaurants have air conditioning, OK.  And that’s because it’s an open space.
B:	It’s very much very open plan and trying to heat it with radiators or trying to cool it down with anything other than, and like as you look around you’ve got a very glass area there, you’ve got big glass area round there and there’s lots of glass and it does in the summer months, it doesn’t even have to be that hot outside, it has the greenhouse effect because you’ve got the glass.  And it does get very very hot and warm and I mean for the team it gets very uncomfortable but even for the guests it gets uncomfortable.  
A:	I suppose there must be a lot of heat generating equipment aswell?
B:	Yes I mean you’ve got all the fridges behind there, even down to the pumps themselves, they get quite warm because they’ve got little lights on and stuff.  And now we’ve got the buffet place, I mean that itself is just a hot light.  You’ve got the base plate, which generates heat up and then the lights that generate heat down. We’ve only had that since November, we’ve not worked a summer with it yet.  It’s great at the moment because as you walk in it helps the heat the place up but come the summer months I can think that that is going to be a nightmare to work behind for the team let alone for any guests that are coming in.
A:	Are the air conditioning systems in the restaurants all the same type of system?
B:	Yes it’s one system, just up here, just those there and there’s one and there’s sort of one there, there’s one just by the bar area, one in the what we call the adult area and then there’s one down in the family area. 
A:	There’s three systems in this building.
B:	Four.
A:	Four systems in this building, OK.
B:	There’s about four and each one is controlled individually so it’s not all linked.  So if you know this area is warm but that area is a bit cooler you can turn this one onto cool air but keep that one so it’s moderating.  
A:	Sure OK.  And what temperature do you set them at?
B:	Throughout sort of like the winter months they are generally set at 23 degrees to just keep the temperature because people are just sat, they’re not running around and things so you’re body temperature, you’re not sort of doing anything, you’re body temperature will just like drop.  And plus obviously on an evening aswell people are coming in from work, they’re tired and your body temperature actually drops again.  So keep at that, I mean I know in the hotel we keep it at like, like we say everything like keep it around 18 but over here we keep it that little bit higher at about 23.  The summer months we’ll just like cold air, cold air, and we’re knocking it down to as low as it will go, I think it goes down to 12 or something and it’s like we want it on freezing.
A:	Yes.  Why 23?
B:	It’s just when we’ve had the engineers that have come out; it’s what they’ve set. I mean on the box that’s on the control box on the wall they’ve wrote 23 and they’ve shown us what setting is best to keep it on to keep an even temperature throughout the restaurant.  
A:	Sure.
B:	And it does sort of throughout the winter months it does feel, you’re not too hot, it’s not uncomfortable for the guys who are working and it’s still warm enough for the guests aswell. 
A:	Sure, right.  And I mean in terms of the uniforms and what people are wearing, are people here in this air conditioning environment wearing the same uniforms as people working in the hotel?
B:	No.
A:	OK how are they different?
B:	Over here their uniform is a black shirt, pants or skirt and an apron and then full shoes and over in the hotel the housekeepers wear a polo shirt and then cargo pants that they can zip the bottoms off so through the summer months they can wear like a three-quarter trouser instead of their full length trousers, again full toe shoes.  And then they also have the jackets, the fleeces that we have available aswell.  So when they’re coming backwards and forwards to bring any rubbish or anything they’re not getting cold.
A:	So the people in the hotel have the option of wearing a fleece at any time?
B:	Yes.
A:	But people over don’t wear fleeces?
B:	No.
A:	Right OK that’s really really interesting.
B:	And then the reception team they have either a blouse or a shirt but then they also have the option of a cardigan or a sweater aswell, not that my guys ever really needs their cardies or sweaters because it’s always warm in there.  But that’s the standard throughout [removed] and I know some days when it’s really been bitterly cold we’ve had it where we’ve had our reception doors open that it can get quite cold in there and you do feel the need.  Whereas over here, because the team are not sort of sat stationary behind a desk, they’re sort of constantly moving about, they are sort of generating their own body heat anyway.
A:	Sure, brilliant.  And do you ever get any, how long are the systems on here, are they on 24 hours or are they on…..?
B:	It’s basically; it’s left on 24 hours yes.  Otherwise, we have had it where when we first go into like the eco friendly and that sort of, we were turning them off on a night time as we were leaving but we were finding that when we were starting in the morning, even in like the not too cold months, not obviously when it was hot but when it was sort of like spring and stuff we found that in a morning it was really cold in the building.  And it could take until nearly the end of breakfast to have warmed up. So guests that were coming over from the hotel in a morning were then sat there with their coats on trying to eat their breakfast shivering.  So it was like we really need to leave it on twenty-four hours just so that the guest comfort is there in a morning.
A	Sure. And the energy consumption of this building, is that incorporated into the traffic light system?
B:	Yes, it’s all tied in in one at the moment because we’re a joint site.  We have one win card that’s done for both.  So all our energy bills and everything are all done centrally for the one site.
A:	Sure.  And who controls the air conditioning systems, is it anybody?
B:	Anybody yes, anyone who knows how to use it basically.  Most of the team will come and speak to a member of the management team to operate it but then some of the team have been shown how to use it aswell just because sometimes you’ll get a guest who will be like, ”it’s a bit cold, is there any chance?” you know, or “that’s blowing”, because it will have kicked in to go onto blow because it will have got too warm or something and it will be blowing on them.  
A:	I don’t suppose you know what portion of the energy these systems use, is it centrally controlled?
B:	It’s all central; they don’t give us that much information.
A:	OK that’s really interesting, thank you very much.  And so is it, like you were saying earlier that the whole hotel tends to be air conditioned where they have the restaurant inside the hotel?
B:	Yes with the [removed] sites, the [removed] sites tend to be moreso city centre or town centre sites so they’ll tend to have the air conditioning rather than no air conditioning purely because the noise level from outside. 
A:	Why are the restaurant and hotel spaces separate in this hotel?
B:	It’s just because it’s a different, when we’ve got the [removed] sites the hotel itself is the predominant business. The restaurant is just like a little side for the guests, it’s a convenience for the guests in the hotel. Whereas here the restaurant is its own business that generates business from the local area and the hotel is its own business that then sends business to the restaurant. One’s not here for the benefit of the other sort of thing.  Whereas the hotels where they have the restaurant inside them the hotel is just put in there for the benefit of the guests.
A:	Sure, fantastic.  I’m coming to the end now because we’ve gone over the hour but do you experience air conditioning in any other areas; it’s quite common in cars here?
B:	Yes we have air conditioning in our car.
A:	You have air conditioning in our car.  What sort of temperature do you set that at or does it change?
B:	We have air conditioning in our car but we have a button and it just like kicks in and it just sets the air conditioning going.  Realistically I think we’ve only used it three or four times anyway.
A:	Right OK, how long have you had the car?
B:	Just coming up two years.  So yes, it’s not something, the actual air conditioning and that, like we’ll switch the fans on in there if we get too warm or we’ll wind the window down and I’d rather do that than press this button that sends the air flow circulating.  And then you’re sat there and it’s like, is it doing anything?  And it’s you know ten minutes later, oh yes the temperature’s gone down; I don’t feel like it’s doing anything.
A:	It’s not immediate?
B:	No.  Whereas if I open the window or I put the fans on to cold air, depending on how cold it is outside you know.  And I think it’s just one of these little tweaky button things that they sort of put in a car and it’s like why, you’ve got windows in the car, if you want an air conditioned car buy a convertible.  
A:	Yes exactly.  Brilliant.  Thank you very much.
B:	No you’re welcome.
A:	That’s all the questions.

