Name of speaker: Transcription
Interviewer: Okay, first thank you very much for agreeing to take part in this follow up interview. We are talking about travel behaviour measures and things related to daily travel and holiday travel and I will go through a couple of points from my list with you, it shouldn’t take more than 30, 40, 50 mins. As I say we are interested in whatever your opinion, so whatever you want to say, there is no right or wrong. Because sometimes people feel they have to tell us certain things, but we are especially interested in genuine opinions. Okay first thing I want to ask you is about peoples travel choices, we originally found out that one major factor influencing peoples travel, peoples travel choices is cost or financial issues, so how does cost influence your own choices, is this an important issue for you?
Male: It does at one level and not at another. I think that for the local bits, I don’t actually, I am not aware of how much roughly I spend on petrol. I do most of my travelling by my own car, and I don’t analyse. Made a bad choice of car about eight years ago and I am stuck with it basically. So I think that has some factor. I think when I take longer journeys, when I go abroad, which I do five, six times a year then I am very much more influenced by the cost of getting there. And particularly to the cost of getting to the airport and parking cars and stuff like that. So, and I tend therefore to use public transport, because I live on my own, it’s more economical to use public transport for longer journeys than it is for shorter journeys.
Interviewer: I see.
Male: So cost is important in that respect, cost isn’t important in local issues. If it’s pouring with rain I will use the car to drive to the shops, five hundred yards away, almost. I will go to the shops and walk in a nice morning like this because it’s nice, but the cost factor doesn’t really come into it as far as that is concerned.
Interviewer: Interesting. But in general terms you said you use a car sometimes…
Male: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: As on a regular basis. Do you feel that car travel in general is cost efficient for you?
Male: Well yes I think it is, because I make the value judgement, being an ex economics teacher there is as far as I am concerned I make the judgement, well I would prefer to spend the money than the experience that not spending money, or reducing the money. So I think it is, I think it is expensive but I am prepared to make that choice. And I think I probably have made the choice, I mean I think I have looked at this and said yes I don’t think it is, I don’t this it is the cheapest way of doing things but living where I do and doing the things I do I work part time, I have got a contract to help somebody out for 2 days a week for the next 12 months, or nearly next 12 months, to do with golf and the PGA and stuff like that. Now I travel 70 miles a day on the days I work, I couldn’t take public transport, I have to travel to Holsworthy. There is no public transport that would get me there….
Interviewer: Yes I know.
Male: …and back again so I just, I am forced into using the car. How long it would take on public transport, if it existed, it would be impractical anyway.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: And of course I feel that the cost of travelling to there offsets the benefit I get in retainer for doing what I am doing and therefore I am a bit keen but I am still out on top so I, I think it is worth doing.
Interviewer: Yes, I see. I know what you are talking about we have been close to Halsworthy just this, for our Easter holidays this year. Yes and I don’t know if you know (4.51) Lakes?
Male: I know of it, yes.
Interviewer: That’s really nice. Nice location.
Male: It is, different country out there.
Interviewer: Yes, very nice. But I know what you’re talking about, I tried to figure out if it is possible to go by public transport, there is nearly nothing.
Male: Just can’t do it.
Interviewer: That’s right. You already mentioned some related points regarding to my next question and when you think of other modes of transport, how does car travel rate alongside other forms of travel in cost terms or financial terms?
Male: Yes, long journeys it’s not cost effective and if I, if I am going to, or…
Interviewer: Take your time.
Male: No I’m trying to….In relation to, I get attracted to airports a long way away because they are cheaper, so I go to Gatwick and Stansted and they are a long way away. It’s uneconomical for me to drive to those places on my own. If there is three of us going, you know some friends, another couple, then we can share the cost and it becomes cost effective, but as a single person it isn’t cost effective, so the further I am away in relation to those journeys the more seriously I look at the cost and that applies to some nearer leisure trips, my wife, who we are separated but we are still quite friendly wanted to go to Topness the other week, we decided to go on the train, old persons railcard and I travel, we travel by train and it cost us £4.50 or something silly like that, after 10 o’clock. Well I couldn’t have driven there and back with the petrol, it would not be. It is slightly inconvenient but on the whole, so the further the journey, it never occurs to me cost effectively wise to use it for a commute into Exeter to do the shopping, I will always take the car to Exeter. But that’s partly to do with the experience of public transport, don’t want to sound snobby but it’s, it’s noisy, inconvenient, it’s slow, you have to stand around in the rain to get it, all of those things makes it an unattractive proposition. And the economy difference isn’t great. Five miles into Exeter in petrol terms, compared to the same journey by bus realistically isn’t a lot of difference I don’t think between what it cost me to drive and what it would, what I could potentially save if i…I would use the train, I think that is a much more attractive form of transport, but the frequency is a bit difficult. They are improving it but the frequency....so I tend to enjoy using the train, it feels like a much better form of transport than the buses, especially where you seem to get the last in the line, before the write off buses in, and I cannot understand, I drive up to Halsworthy and up to Biddersford at bit as well, and what they do, driving around with these great big double deckers with 4 people in them, I really don’t know, but obviously it makes sense to them so.
Interviewer: Just a question of efficiency!
Male: Oh well who knows.
Interviewer: Yes. I remember wasn’t it that in Crediton the train station is a little bit remote?
Male: It is a little remote. I would drive to the coast actually. 
Interviewer: So leave your car there and….
Male: I leave my car there and…
Interviewer: And then take the train. Okay.
Male: Which I do. I am a member of Taunton Cricket Ground, Somerset County Cricket, so I go quite a lot in the summer. Now much cheaper, slightly more convenient, but I am going out for the day so it doesn’t really matter. I drive down to Crediton, get on the train, change trains at Exeter. I don’t have to pay to park my car in Crediton. I have to wait sometimes for a connection back up to Crediton, you know at the end of the day they tend to be a bit off, but it is, that is a very inexpensive way of me travelling and I quite enjoy it, so that’s not a problem.
Interviewer: Okay. One last point in this block. Before they found out that people value time saving whilst travelling you know. Do you feel that, especially car travel is a time efficient way of travelling for you, or does this an issue for you anyway?
Male: Well because I am mostly retired time isn’t a huge factor so it is an issue which relates to me particularly going into Exeter and the issue which is slightly different is the out of town nature of some of the places that I want to go to visit. So if I am going to go to PC World or I want to pop in there or go to Tescos at the same time, that would be, it’s feasible journey to drive to Exeter or get the bus to Exeter then get another bus out but it’s basically then becomes just a logistics nightmare and I don’t want to be bothered with it. I think a time issue related to that, also time issue is you are walking away, you’ve bought what you want to, bang them in the car and you go home, you are not going to hang around and waiting for the next available public transport which is going to come your way. So it is convenient and it’s comfortable, you can control the heating and you can control everything else in it. It’s quite difficult because you can’t unmake comfort. We have all been used to the comfort and the convenience of it and you cannot just switch it off, so to speak you know.
Interviewer: Thank you. That brings me to my next point on the list. A very general question now. Do you feel that we in general we need to change the way we travel, in terms of daily travel or maybe the holiday travel?
Male: I don’t know whether we feel….I mean ultimately. I’ll start this again, I keep trying to start the sentence. I don’t, I think change will come but it will be change that will be forced on people by their circumstances, if for example I am in a traffic jam trying to get into Exeter just to go shopping I will reconsider my method by which I go into Exeter. I don’t alluding to all the other issues that relate to transport. I don’t think I feel any pressure personally to change the way I exist in relation to the environment, global warming, whatever. I am a great, my belief is that people will only make changes that they see are practical to them, you can’t un invent the convenience of having their own cars. Only if we stop being prosperous enough as a nation to have our own cars. I mean this is not an issue if you took it to an African village, because nobody’s got any cars, they just have to walk to wherever they can go to and that’s the end of that. Now we have choices and I think by and large we just desperately selfish species and we will go on choosing what we want to do as we want to do it. So I think change will come, but it will come perhaps not in a way that people envisage it will come. It will get to crowded, get too expensive, will get, you know, something else will come and take it’s place and then people will change.
Interviewer: Okay. So you already mentioned some things that could be the reasons for change, congestion or environmental problems and things like that, could at least create some necessity for changes. 
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: If people, I think a different question we will come back to that. 
Male: I think it will be those issues. I think congestion is likely to bring about the major changes. If you can’t get on the train and you can’t get on a bus you can’t park your car, you can’t do the things that are convenient you stop doing them. Now I have stopped going to Exeter on a Saturday, between now and the end of the January sales, it’s just too much of a nightmare to do.
Interviewer: Yes it’s crazy.
Male: You know. Now I think you can perhaps see that situation developing over time so in 15 years time, it’s just a nightmare to go to Exeter full stop on a Saturday or a Friday and then there are other economic changes that I’ve seen in my life. Is the out of town shopping facilities where people will just, will go to, you know we have got a new Tescos store but it causes a traffic jam every night at 5 o’clock for people coming from Exeter to Crediton. I mean ultimately will people get so fed up with Tesco and Sainsburys because they can create traffic bottle necks. You can’t get around Exeter without going passed a Sainsburys. Will ultimately that bring changes in brand and people will decide perhaps we don’t want to build them there, you know. It’s just an anti-social thing to be doing, but as long as they keep making money they will keep on doing them.
Interviewer: So it there could be some that say that planning is at fault maybe?
Male: Yes I think, I think planning is an extraordinary blunt instrument at the best of times and because of the active orders which relate to planning, I have had some experience in this. Planning theory or planning principals seem to lag 10 or 15 years behind current practice. So that the things that are asking to be done were thought of 15 years ago, they have only just drifted into the planning process. I suspect in this country we are over planned as well.
Interviewer: Okay. Thank you. Next very general question, sorry for that. What is your view of current transport policy? Whatever you want to talk about local scale or national scale.
Male: Well I don’t know whether there is a transport policy that actually says, what is actually going on, there is…and because transport policy is by it’s nature, extraordinarily localised. I came back from Birmingham airport at about half past 1 in the morning. I left Birmingham airport from a beach in Malaga, to Majorca, and I came back and I drove down the motorway from Birmingham to here got here at quarter to 5 and there was a line of lorries and I don’t think there was more than about 5 lorry lengths between each lorry, all the way down the inside lane, you know. So it was a train of lorries and yet there was a driver in every carriage, that doesn’t make sense to me. You go on a continent, now I know we haven’t got, we have got a canal system, it would still work if we wanted to make it work, you can still get to Birmingham to London, to Manchester, to Liverpool, to Sheffield to Leeds, you can still, those canals still work and it doesn’t seem to me, it doesn’t matter that it takes five days to get to London to Birmingham, as long as you have got one barge with 140 tonnes on, which they will carry, arriving every day. It makes no difference to me at all, you know. I know the stock levels are higher and therefore it’s uneconomical to do but the cost of moving that is just ludicrous. You see trains snaking through you know France and Germany, they are 120 carriages long, that’s 120 different engines, the railway engine is not 150 times as greedy in fuel, in resources and requires one driver, you know. So I can’t, I know it’s the same philosophy, the philosophy that says I want to get in my car, I want to drive conveniently to Exeter park, get my stuff come back again. It is what each manufacturer wants to do when they distribute goods and I can see (22.40) but I cannot for the life of me see why stuff that is coming from a long, long way away can’t be put on some pallet and stuck on a train. If it takes a day longer what does it matter? I bought this three piece suite, it came from Sheffield and it came on a lorry from Sheffield, now I had to wait 2 and a half weeks for it to arrive, if it had come a day later it wouldn’t have made a sods bit of difference to me. And I can’t, I think we have at this present moment concentrated hugely on passenger movement by train and completely ignored the transport of cargo, materials by train. What could have come down the M5, that night when I drove back could be accommodated in 3 trains. That could have run at night when no passengers are on trains at night. So I see it a desperately poor attempt at moving cargo around this country by anything other than lorries and I think that is a very weak part of our infrastructure, I think it costs us as a nation lots and lots of money in terms of non competitiveness. We have got all the railway lines there, they actually exist, just that they are not used from 10 o’clock until 6 o’clock the next morning. A long time, so I do see a lack of policy. I do see policy as well which is driven by global warming issues and I don’t necessarily think they are really quite relevant and b that they are going to work and I certainly don’t think taxing people for travelling will work. I am not, it doesn’t bother me in terms of the money, but I just don’t think it works. Some people just pay, you know, if it’s £50 to go to Majorca and you put £12.50 tax on it, it’s £62.50 to go to Majorca, but it’s still pay it.
Interviewer: I see, well interesting point though, we will come back to that, because there are some of these included in our travel scenarios. I want you to think of, I’ll just check….Think of an ideal world travel wise, you know. I don’t know maybe that public transport is available everywhere and very frequently running and more or less convenient and just jobs close by that we can walk to, so that’s, think of an ideal world in terms of travel. How would you like to travel in an ideal world, would you still use the car, would you probably favour other means of transport?
Male: I think I would, I have a vision, because I have thought about this. I would like to turn the old railway line between Crediton Barnstable into a narrow boat canal, I just think it would work, commercially it would help business wise and turn the railway into a narrow gage, like a, either a mad lab or a funicular on the rail. Yes like a funicular, like a chair lift it just keeps going. Just drops into a lane, door opens, it goes ever so slowly, you get on it, door close again. You have got a continuous loop of transport. Now ultimately I remember as a child when we had trams in Birmingham and they ran up and down the middle of the roads and they were seen to be efficient, so I could see a system whereby you have say trams running up and down the high street, all I have got to do is walk to the high street, I get on, I can always see one, it’s always on its way. I step into one that will take me to the station but it will be an interchange there where I can step straight onto another one that’s moving and moves out the way and then, I don’t mind, I can see a situation where you could keep changing, you step off one and go to another. Say if you were running that line from here to Barnstable, the frequency of the cars on the loop from Exeter say from Cobblestone, because of the fact of the urban pull through Exeter. The ones, if you want to go beyond Cobblestone they would be less frequent.
Interviewer: I see.
Male: Then you get somewhere the other side Eggersford and then Barnstable effect comes in so you put more carriages on, more cars on, whatever. So I think that that sort of more or less instance movement from one place to another. Now that’s really not anymore complicated than a tube system. You know, let’s get off one and get to another and you know, I have got to go, I still mark examination papers. If I have got to go to a meeting in London, then I now know how to do that. I get on that one, get off there, step across the platform, get on that one, go up some escalators, get the next one. And that facility, if it works in the city, it should work in at least a semi rural environment as well. Now if that connected, that system connected to my railway train to Birmingham or London, so I just get off at Exeter, just slows down, we get off there, and then I go and find my train to London, that’s fine and they go frequently enough, I wouldn’t see any problem with anything about…I think the major intercity passenger system is really quite good at the moment. I don’t think you could make a lot of improvement on that, I suppose eventually you can get the speed up a bit but I don’t think that makes much difference I don’t think, I think but this capacity to step on and off stuff I think is the key to it and if I can say, right I am just going to walk up to the High Street and I will just get on the loop, you might even have, if this little road at the bottom here goes out of the Rugby Club and you stand out there, had a connection as well, a little tram line going up there, well that’s fine, there would be no, more generous bits that you could have crossing places. I think that would work. It would be enormously expensive, but it’s not rocket science and it’s not, it’s not huge technological, you know I mean when I used to look at comics in the early 50’s I suppose, you know you had these visions of cities with tubes and people and it’s the individual nature of the capacity to make the moves that’s the important thing. So you do it at your pace, rather than, have to wait for everybody.
Interviewer: That is really interesting.
Male: Off the wall here.
Interviewer: We are interested in everything, you know. Especially for people to come up with ideas of broad visions for the future. But that brings me to another point, because we came up with some. Sorry I have to…daily travel scenarios, go back to daily travel. If you can go through it and I will read it out for you to give you some time. As I said they are purely hypothetical and it’s just a collection of different measures. And I would ask you to tell us if you think one of these would work, just one bullet point, it doesn’t have to be the whole scenario, you can pick out single things, single measures and then tell me what you think of that and if you find something that would work for you or you think that would work in general, then I would ask you to say that and if you think that there is something that really would never work then you can also let me know that. I will just go through it to give you some time to read it. Scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport punctuality and reliability, use smart card ticketing and simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities could be one measure, major public transport infrastructure improvements, but there would be an increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures. That’s scenario one and as I said you can always pick out single things. Scenario two includes increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars omitting more pollutants, so related to environment issues, congestion charges in most towns and cities is also one strategy, more toll roads, paying to drive, where you pay more to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas and some of the results could be major improvements in public transport in tax revenues, there is also major improvements in public transport services, a significant reduction in congestion on major roads and a significant reduction in carbon emissions and that brings us to scenario three, where you can see that some are more drastic and some are more radical and some are more soft measures. So scenario three starts with banning vehicles with highly polluting engines or maybe introducing no car days like one day per week without a car. Already installed in some cities, full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones, or maybe you could try to restrict the number of cars each household could own. And again major and sustained decreases in traffic levels is one result and a possible switch over to public transport service infrastructure and another result could be major reductions in carbon emissions. So, yes now it’s time for you to tell me what you think. Is there anything that you think that could work and force at least some change?
Male: Yes, I think it’s quite interesting. I tend to feel that I was more in line with scenario one, than I was with the other two to be honest.
Interviewer: Yes, that’s ok.
Male: But I think the, the changes have got to come with, with innovations, I think we have got to look at public transport in a different way. It seems to me that using old buses more and more isn’t the way. I think if we are going to implement major changes to transport infrastructure, like the ones I was outlining for example, which would be increases, I think ultimately that the provision might have to be nationalised.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: That if we are going to have a national plan for…I mean I think an increased frequency of bus and rail services, but it’s what the quality of those bus and rail services are like. I really, the key to people using them, rather than necessarily their frequency. There are three buses an hour I think from Exeter to Beddington from here, every 20 mins. So I don’t see the frequency is an issue, I see getting on a 15 year old bus with steamed up windows and a draft is an issue.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: For those people who are using it. If you can compare that to my almost mobile arm chair, which is my chair.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: So I don’t think enough, enough consideration is being taken to woo people onto the system, so what you are doing is your making the alternative to car use a second rate experience. So it’s the quality, I think all of these increases in public transport, punctuality and reliability, ticketing would help so the thing is not stuck by the side of a road all the time, in fact that’s why I would like to see the thing on a very slow moving thing, you just get on and off it, it doesn’t get in the way. And I think then major public transport infrastructure would change, yes that’s got to change as well.
Interviewer: (38.45) related to you is nothing.
Male: Yes. I think if delivered then I personally would be comfortable to pay the extra taxation. I don’t like penal taxation, a I don’t think it works, b it’s not transparent so it’s very difficult to see that revenues raised in one area are only going to be spent in one area. I can see as an economist that that’s, you can’t run a country that way. You can get all these taxes in then divide them up so only people who have got children at school age. Tax money goes to school, you know that it doesn’t work, you know. And therefore I think the money isn’t transparent so therefore people feel they are just being exploited.
Interviewer: That’s pretty much related to most of the services.
Male: The odd few things.
Interviewer: You already mentioned that you think that probably…and if we are looking for behavioural change you said that probably people would just resist change and pay if they have to.
Male: You have got to improve the quality of the experience before people will make change, because they will make that as a positive choice, you know. I am already you see, in January I am going skiing, to old for it really but, can’t resist it going skiing! I am going to Gatwick, now the experience of driving to Gatwick is dreadful compared to me getting on a train at Exeter, I open my paper on the table, I get my cup of coffee, you know that is the…so it was an economic choice, but actually it’s also an experience choice. The quality of the experience is tremendous, you know. And…so if people make choices on a quality basis, then that I think is the way you will get people to change, if that’s what you want them to do. Now I can’t see that, it doesn’t seem to me that using a whole load of ancient buses to increase, belching out fumes is an improvement in any case, you know but people aren’t going to make those sorts of choices in a big way. I mean the only people using the buses is people who get a free bus passes it seems to me. Me being one of them, but I very seldom use it, just because it’s relatively inconvenient. So the second things where, you know effectively it’s become in scenario three you are now penalising people, you know you are making social judgement whether they should be, now I don’t think you can do that, I think the nation as a whole needs to move an awful long way until it becomes as convinced about pollution as it was about smoking.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: You then can say you can’t smoke in a building, you cannot use that because you are damaging the environment, but the connection for the average person is so distance and difficult to prove in a convincing way. I think most people tend to think, oh it’s just a way of raising extra revenue isn’t it.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: And then….I can understand toll roads for long distances, you know France, Spain they’ve all got them and it does improve the quality of the…but they are very big countries with lots of space and it’s a little bit different there. 
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: So in scenario three what I have disbanded, most of that, switch over to a public transport focused infrastructure and then I would go along with that, but it needs a radical examination of what really is required I think.
Interviewer: There would probably be planning issues and as you said if you could have new Tescos by the outskirts of town, there is no public transport and there’s no choice.
Male: You just have to drive over there.
Interviewer: So that’s probably what’s meant by that, that you should first think of means how to get there and then give planning permission.
Male: Yes absolutely.
Interviewer: Yes. Okay thanks. You can keep it if you want.
Male: No that’s alright, no.
Interviewer: I can recycle. But I have to give you just three more scenarios, a little bit shorter and now related to holiday travel, you know. You already brought up the issue, you said climate change and carbon emissions could be a major problem and sometimes difficult to address these issues because it’s such a distant thing happening, so there are some ways of maybe dealing with that, or ask people to change their holiday travel behaviour. Again purely hypothetical and I have just, we will go through it the same way we did just then. I would again ask you to pick out a single thing or tell me what you think about these single measures, if there is something that would work or would not work. So scenario one includes encouraging carbon offsetting schemes. I mean are you familiar with carbon offsetting just as a means of changing something.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: Okay. The same point is, incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket cost, provide employee based schemes for promoting slower travel, by giving people more leave if they use other means of transport, or incentivise UK holidays, perhaps through tax VAT, not paying VAT for UK holidays. Scenario two again a little bit more radical, increased air passenger tax, a duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, that would be relatively new because that is not the case at the moment. Tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane could be one idea and invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK, would be one possible outcome. And scenario three is quite a relatively simple but comprehensive, provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, for instance flying, daily travel or energy used at home they can undertake. That means that if somebody gets a carbon budget and he wants to fly, use a long distance flight or something like that, they have to find ways to save carbon on other activities and let’s say use less energy at home or travel differently on their daily travel. It’s an idea that was brought up recently and we just want to include these measures here. Anything you could think that could work or could be, could encourage peoples travel behaviour again?
Male: I think, in scenario one, I am not sure of the, offsetting schemes they don’t work because it doesn’t actually stop you the carbon user or the carbon using company or organisation from thinking about how much carbon they are doing, just offset that against something else and it’s done, so I don’t think it has a practical effect on people in turn. I quite like the idea to incentivise long distance rail travel because I think it is possible with a bit more efficiency now the channel tunnel operates properly, who get onto a serious of continental places to, so I think it could be something on that. On employer based schemes, there would be all sorts of stuff on that, it would cost you more money to do that.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: I think to a certain extent, UK holiday might work but at the end of the day peas could rain and it doesn’t snow and if you want to go skiing then you’ve got to go to a mountain, because you can’t ski across a flat field can you. So I really don’t think that that is a long term effect, I thin you can marginally improve the number by point five, you know half a per cent in, but I don’t know. I mean I don’t see any of the other things which is…I think the only one thing that I think that I think that is probably tax on the environmental performance of aeroplanes, I think that would encourage people to. I think flybe have done well, because they still fly an awful lot of quite efficient low carbon emission turbo type aircraft, I mean it doesn’t matter to me if it takes me 20 mins longer to get to Salsburg from Exeter, you know it’s going to take me all day to get there, it’s going to take me 12 hours from leaving the house to getting to my hotel, so it doesn’t make any difference so I think speed has become too much of a factor in aircraft, I know it’s economy so the more flights you can get. I was very lucky I was involved in a travel and tourism project for NVQ and one of the study weekends was in Dublin, it was a bit of a jolly but what’s her name from Ryanair came to talk to us for half an hour, three quarters of an hour, there was only 24 of us. Their philosophy was incredible, he said I fly a mobile coffee shop, if I, every hour and a half I get a new lot of 135 customers that I can sell coffee too. If you had a coffee shop in Soho, if you had 135 customers for a morning you would be lucky. He said I reckon to get through a thousand customers a day and sell them all a cup of coffee. It doesn’t matter does it, you know, you will tax these guys and they will find a way of offsetting it won’t make any difference at all. The other issue which I think is difficult is for the distance flown, that’s the murky waters that might work, but my daughter lives in Tasmania.
Interviewer: Have you been visiting her?
Male: No I don’t. But I am actually going by boat because I have….
Interviewer: Nice.
Male: Well I had a heart bypass operation and so I have a dodgy leg because they took the vein out of my leg, so they are a bit worried about thrombosis and stuff like that, you know if I spend too long in an aeroplane, so I think I might go on a container vessel.
Interviewer: A container?
Male: That would be good fun.
Interviewer: I think so, definitely.
Male: I think the idea of a carbon budget is quite good, I think if I had a credit card that I could stick in then, you know I won’t put the fire on, it’s not that cold really I will just go and put a jumper on, you know you would do those kinds of things. I wouldn’t leave the computer running, you would switch it off. So I think there are, even because I think it would focus peoples attention, I think it would be…I will speak to someone who would send it on, but I think it would be difficult to get some people, elderly people switched into it and it might cause some people, particularly elderly ladies too much saving against their own benefit, so they’ll get too cold. For young households I think there is a real, a real choice about saying well we’ll have showers or we won’t have a soak in the bath or if you do have a soak in the bath, this is your weekly luxury.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: You know, so that, that you then have a judgement about what you can do and I quite like the idea of that, you know that every time my car doesn’t go and I have walked and I have saved half of whatever on it. So I think that is quite a good idea, which could be incorporated into ticketing systems for public transport, so you have one card that recorded everything.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: So you would get plus points for using public transport, and minus points because you put the card in the car before the car warmed up, yes I like that, that’s good. That will go along with my radical rolling road or funicular.
Interviewer: Yes could be some educational issues about that.
Male: Yes I think it’s changes peoples awareness, it’s about experimental learning isn’t it.
Interviewer: If you can tell your kids switch off the lights or we can’t fly to Majorca or something like that.
Male: Exactly, yes. I mean it makes a difference but because it brings a thing, at the moment it’s all a bit hypothetical for us, it’s all out here isn’t it. What am I actually doing today, what is happening I mean am I using any carbon, what’s the effect on the environment because it rained this morning and that’s my fault, you know but it might have been indirectly.
Interviewer: Could be you never know.
Male: You don’t no, whereas if you say it’s on the card here, let’s have a print out, oh look how much carbon we used, you know, I think it would benefit.
Interviewer: Yes okay, thank you. There is two more questions.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: The first one brings us back to local travel and daily travel. Are you aware of schemes like Car Share Devon? Do you know what that is?
Male: Yes, well I have seen the signs for it, yes.
Interviewer: Do you know how it works that you arrange a driving party so to say and you pick up somebody you know and if you share the same way it’s easier and it saves even some money with giving somebody a lift or something like that.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: And do you think that could work for you for some things or are there barriers that would never make it work for you and that are not easily….?
Male: I think it wouldn’t work through practical…I don’t travel regularly to one place, except for the moment I am going to Holdsworth, but I don’t honestly think that there’s anybody doing that at 7 o’clock in the morning who I could share a car with, you know. You don’t know when you are going to come back and so I think I would find it too much of a chore, you know you’ve got to ring up somebody and only going into Exeter, no I don’t think it works for me. I think it does work for people who commute daily to Exeter or from Exeter to here then that does have potential and particularly for places like the Met Office and the County Council and perhaps the University that people go to work and they have got their own, they park the car on site so people have got to walk to that particular area. I don’t think it works for more individual type of schemes.
Interviewer: Do you know something about car clubs, where you don’t own a car, it’s like hiring a car for short term on a very short notice, that they have, I think the local car club in Exeter is named Co Cars and they have several stations where they provide you with a car and you have to book in advance and the main advantages that you save some money if you don’t use your car excessively you know, because you share, you share the fixed costs, you know, so I think up to 8,000 miles a year or something like that, if you drive less, it’s even cheaper to use a car club, because of the shared car system. Do you see that this could work for you, if it would exist in Crediton?
Male: I think so, yes. I mean I could see that I could just as easily walk to a car club, wherever it was here and not have the bother of insurance and taxing my own car and having it serviced and all those other things, yes I can see that happening, providing it wasn’t too far away to the centre and you know the car was regularly available. It’s the short, oh I must go and do so and so.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: And I don’t know how that would fit in.
Interviewer: Yes you would have to have instant access to it, yes that’s right. Okay that brings me to my last question again a general one to sum it up you know, to get people in general or you, whatever you want to focus on there, to change behaviour, to change travel behaviour, what do you think are the key messages people want to hear and from whom and what policies needs to change? Are there any key messages that should be addressed?
Male: Yes. If, I think it’s a quality of the transport provided, I think that’s the key messages, I think there is too much stick and not enough carrot.
Interviewer: Okay. And by providing transport by private operators whose only consideration are economic ones the service provision is not a good experience. I think the network of provision has to be improved. I see it work in Crediton, there is a little community bus that goes round and a lot of people use that, in and around Crediton to get from there, there to Morrisons and back up to the library and it does those sorts of circuits and I think those sorts of little circuits could be improved, so the proximity to public transport is much closer to individuals. The station is so far away, if you live up there, where I used to live, that’s fine I walk down onto the High Street, when I get off the bus and it’s raining I then walk 10 mins up a hill, I have then got to transfer to a little route, then that would be much more easier. So I think the, not necessarily the frequency but the availability, so that the network was spread over a wider area would be one thing. I would dearly love there to be a serious effort to make the movement of goods in the country much more efficient than it is at the moment. I think it is outrageously complicated and it’s outrageously expensive. I think that above all things, if we are looking at pollution it is outrageously polluted. The amount of particulates have been bashed into the air by exhaust pipes on these lorries is tremendously polluting which we just seem to ignore and so the concentration is forcing individuals to pay for transport change, by increasing tax on cars and tax on fuel and tax on personal aeroplane flights, but it doesn’t seem to me to be anything to be done say and again in a positive way saying we can provide this system which is going to move your goods cheaper, don’t have to have all these lorries, just take it to the rail end and it goes. And it seems to me that you have got to make that attractive to the people who move cargo and we are at, I think, we, the government, successive governments have been frightened of taking on the transport lobby, it’s going to cost more and everybody’s going to have to pay £10 more for a fridge and all of these sorts of stuff. Why do we move petrol around the country in tankers, it’s called a pipe, it isn’t that difficult, you know. How can….if we can move gas from North Sea down here, surely we can have a pipe that goes to the Shell station and up the High Street and it’s only a question of laying out. Why didn’t somebody put a fuel pipe in the road at the same time when they were putting a gas pipe and a telephone pipe, you know? It’s just ludicrous to think that sort of something is moved in tiny little tankers by some bloke driving and so in policy terms that’s got to be more efficient, much better for the environment and I think ultimately will reduce costs in terms of goods and services, so.