Name of speaker: Transcription
Interviewer: Thank you for agreeing to take part in this interview as I said we are talking about travel and transport related measures and your views on things and if you talk about travel I often refer to daily travel, so what means of transport you use to get to work, to go home, to go shopping or but also about holiday travel so I will specify certain things in my topic guide a bit later. So let me start with a really general question in the first place. Much of our research indicates that cost is a major factor influences peoples travel choices, how does cost influence your own choices?
Female: Doesn’t come into it at all really, I don’t think. I can afford to run a car and my husband can afford to run a car and so we run two cars.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: We need two cars for a busy family, so we have to do what we have to do to get through life really.
Interviewer: Okay, so you have, you probably have other reasons to say we use a car and not cost in the first place?
Female: Yes we do walk an awful lot of places, we don’t use the car for short journeys, it’s mainly for sort of travelling to Exeter for example and then we would get a park and ride bus into Exeter, so we are sort of using public transport as well, but yes the cost isn’t influencing us in that way. We enjoy the holidays that we enjoy as well, when we can afford to do it.
Interviewer: Okay. Good. Do you feel that car travel is cost effective in general?
Female: Not really. No I do use the car as little as possible, preferring to walk when there is time and it’s within walking distance really, but it is expensive to run a car and to maintain a car and it is a biggest waste of money that you’ve go I think.
Interviewer: But like you some might have to have a car to get around.
Female: Yes, my husband needs a car for his job and I need a car 70% of me during holidays and 10% of the time during the working week, but when the school holidays are here I am using the car a lot more but that’s the time that I use the car more.
Interviewer: Okay, thank you. What do you think of, for you in person, how does car travel rate alongside other forms of travel in cost terms?
Female: I suppose because I have got a car and I have paid out for a car and I am maintaining the car and paying insurance on the car we use that rather than using public transport, so I could take the bus to Exeter, but because I have the car I don’t need to and you sort of spending two lots of money really unnecessarily so…What was the question again?
Interviewer: How do you rate car travel in terms of cost to other modes of transport?
Female: So I suppose if I didn’t have my own car I would use the public transport a lot more, but probably no more than using my car now.
Interviewer: Do you think it would be cheaper for you, do you know that?
Female: I would say it probably would be cheaper, but not so convenient and you would be tied to the times of the buses, etc because we don’t live near a train station here, if we had a train station here in Collumpton then I would certainly use the train a lot, that would be a main travelling point, I would say I would use it to get to Taunton or Exeter, but because there isn’t, then it is very difficult.
Interviewer: Yes that’s the main problem here, unfortunately.
Female: My friends live in London and you know if we lived in a suburb that they do with a cheap station on the door step then I wouldn’t need a car, there would be no need for it to have a car, but because of the links we have got here and the difficultly of catching a bus when it is convenient for you, it’s impossible not to have a car really.
Interviewer: Okay. We have also found that people value time saving, whilst travelling, you mentioned already time is an issue for you. Do you feel that car travel is a time efficient way of travelling?
Female: Definitely because you can go when you want to go, you are not tied by a timetable.
Interviewer: So the flexibility is a main issue for you?
Female: Yes, yes exactly.
Interviewer: Okay. Great…
Female: You are not sat there thinking oh I have got to go and catch the bus, I need to be finished at such and such at time, so.
Interviewer: And in terms of travel times, what do you think?
Female: Certainly quicker as well, the bus from Exeter from here can take you 45 minutes to an hour, it’s not a good, not a good bus service really.
Interviewer: How much is it by car? About?
Female: 20 mins.
Interviewer: Really.
Female: Yes, if that probably.
Interviewer: Okay. I just came by bus that’s why I am asking I just wondered. I think it was 35 minutes or something like that.
Female: That’s the shorter one, if you take the other one that goes all around the villages it is 45 minutes to an hour even.
Interviewer: Yes I have done this too but, I mean it’s an interesting journey, but you are probably much faster by car, that’s right.
Female: Definitely.
Interviewer: Okay. We have already reaching next block on my topics, we are talking about travel measures and including holiday, so daily travel and holiday travel. A very general question I ask people, do you feel that we need to change the way we travel?
Female: Yes I think so, in this generation certainly will need to think about it in a different way, I think maybe that needs to be an infrastructure set up, not necessarily from individuals I think it needs to be more of an infrastructure put into place for, to make it easier for people to travel on public transport. So, but there will need to be a change in some way or another, and also the cost of insurance for younger people it will me that, they won’t be able to afford to run a car, like my daughter in particular it’s going to cost more than the car is worth to insure a car for a year, so that will be a measure I would think that in the future that means there will be less cars on the road.
Interviewer: Okay. So you say less cars on the road. What reason do you think there could be for changing travel behaviour?
Female: I think lack of affordability on cars, individual cars will be definitely and the fact that fuel maybe will become more expensive in the future and I suppose that may come at a cost where people can’t afford to fill the car with fuel, because it will be so expensive.
Interviewer: So do you think there should be official measures accounting for that, or do you think people will have to change their own travel behaviour, for instance you if fuel prices go up?
Female: I probably wouldn’t need to change my behaviour necessarily because I don’t tend to use the car hugely anyway. I probably put about £40 a month into my car, so it’s not used excessively. So a cost wouldn’t necessarily affect me, but I can see it affecting younger people in future generations.
Interviewer: Okay, what do you think about problems like congestion jungle or lets say environmental problems, could these be reasons to change the way we travel?
Female: Well if we change the way we travel the rest of the world has to take that on board as well, there is no point us doing it and China not having the measures in place as well. Anything we do in this country is negated by what China does or Japan or the rest of the world, everyone needs to, it needs to be global, not just what UK are doing, otherwise it’s not going to make a blind bit of difference. I think locally there is an awful lot of congestion which could be avoided, more people walking to school rather than, my neighbour for example will drive her child to school in her big gas guzzler car which is a 4 minute walk, and more education I suppose need to be put onto people who, whom could possible walk, you know they would rather get there 10 minutes early than spend 10 minutes walking to the school and I think that is wrong really.
Interviewer: Okay. I have to ask you that because we are also focusing on some measures, which the government announced they want to reduce carbon emissions by, I think it is 2050, by 80% or something like that. In view of that, what is your view of current transport policy? Or you can answer this question in a general view, in a general manner.
Female: I don’t really know anything about the current transport policy to be honest!
Interviewer: Is there something like that!
Female: I don’t know.
Interviewer: Some people answer, yes there is no transport policy you know.
Female: I am not aware of anything, all I know is that I think the public transport that we have in Deben needs to be improved and there needs to be some government funding to do that. 
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: And not necessarily to be in the same way that London with the underground and that sort of thing, but people who live in London and come into Deben couldn’t possibly live in Deben the way they live in London because there isn’t the infrastructure in place. I have got friends who visit from London regularly and she says I don’t know how you manage because I cannot cope without my tube and all the bus services and the trains that run regularly around her. But that could be because there is a large population obviously, but it’s becoming that way in Deben now, so definitely needs to be better links I think in the community for anything to change.
Interviewer: Also including integrated public transport (9.56) would easily be able to change…
Female: Yes exactly, definitely. And like we are on, we have got a train line that runs through Collumpton, but there is no station here so the cost of a station would be a small amount I would imagine, because the train is already here, the train track is here, so it would be a case of having a station and that would be much more convenient for people in Collumpton to use a train and I think more people would use a train to get to work.
Interviewer: Okay. Quite a different question, try to imagine an ideal world, you already mentioned some things related to that. If you wanted to change your own travel behaviour, how would you like to travel in an ideal world? You said something, you would be happy to use public transport and it would be more convenient.
Female: Yes I would if it was more convenient. If it was more direct as well I suppose, not so many, I suppose it’s not fair on the outside villages if they don’t have a service. But definitely a train would be more beneficial in Collumpton especially, I am thinking of myself now, but maybe more cycle paths, more cycling, more secure places to store bikes around, that maybe something that would help, more education for children I think to use bikes and think about the way they travel, it’s got to start really at the teenagers, if people are willing to get off their backsides and walk more often!
Interviewer: Why?
Female: Because it makes me so cross the number of people, especially walking through Collumpton on a morning, that could walk their children to school and they choose not to and it’s, it’s just, I don’t know what it is, it’s, whether they are not organised or there is not enough time in the day, but it just seems a lot of pointless journeys, but there you go.
Interviewer: Okay. So what reasons could there be for walking more often for instance, do you see other than, I mean obviously it is quite a cheap way to travel, but is there other reasons?
Female: Well there is health benefits basically. It gets people talking to each other as well, you have that extra time to talk, when you are not focusing on doing a million other things, and driving, you know that sort of thing, so I think it is a valuable time, that’s why I have always try to instil in my children and they don’t mind walking anywhere, it’s quite good.
Interviewer: I think you are absolutely right. I mean children take in much more when they walk to school than when they are driving.
Female: Yes, definitely.
Interviewer: Okay. The third point on my list. We developed a set of scenarios with some measures here related to daily travel, you know. You don’t have to be afraid that one of those or some will be introduced here in Collumpton and in Deben in general, it’s just a collection of general measures that would probably be possible, but there is no need to fear that we will do it, because there are some more soft measures and some more drastic measures and I want you to go through these things, I will also read it out and pick single things if you think would work for you or for others in general, you can also tell me if you think they would never work and I would also ask you about something if you don’t mention that.
Female: Okay.
Interviewer: I will give you that, If you can just go through it and I will also read it out for you. Scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services.
Female: That would be definitely something.
Interviewer: Improvements in public transport in punctuality and reliability.
Female: Most definitely.
Interviewer: Use smart card ticketing and simpler and reduced fares.
Female: Again definitely
Interviewer: We will also go through it after I have read it out, you know it, I will just go through it in a rush and then we will talk about it. Major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements and, but it would be necessary to increase taxation to pay directly for public transport measures. Scenario two includes increased parking charges in urban areas. We already have that in some cities. Increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for car with emitting more pollutants and congestion charges in most towns and cities, more toll roads, paying to drive where you pay more to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas is an idea and the result could be major improvements in public transport and major improvements in public services, significant reduction in congestion on major roads and significant reduction in carbon emissions and scenario three covers banning vehicles with highly polluting engines, or you could try and introduce no car days, maybe one day per week, full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres, with no drive zones, in some cities you already have that or a restriction in the number of cars each house hold could own, is also an idea and resulting in major and sustained increases in traffic levels, a general switch over to public transport for this infrastructure, you already mentioned that, and major reduction in carbon emissions. So what do you think of these things?
Female: Well we have talked about a lot of those already haven’t we really.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right. So we can maybe pick up on that. Yes you said the first block seemed to be reasonable to you?
Female: I don’t know about the increase in taxation to pay directly for public transport measures, I think a lot of organisation, re-organisation within the infrastructure of organisation administration could be, could save a lot of those things I am sure. The smart card ticketing, simpler and reduced fares would be ideal because I think I don’t know what the price is now to drive to, or to get on the bus from Exeter to Collumpton, but I think, last time I went I think it was about £4.50 return.
Interviewer: Yes, I think I paid £4.60.
Female: Yes. So that’s, it’s not cost effective for me necessarily and my two children to go into Exeter on the bus, when I can go into Exeter, use the park and ride system in and then it’s much cheaper that way, much cheaper.
Interviewer: Do you cycle sometimes?
Female: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: So cycling facilities could also be an issue that could be improved.
Female: Yes definitely. I don’t tend to cycle with the children so much, because it’s a dangerous, dangerous roads around here, it’s far to busy, far too many cars on the road, there’s no cycle lanes, so we tend not to use the cycling, it’s more for leisure, rather than for going somewhere.
Interviewer: Okay. And scenario two, anything that would work for you, would be acceptable or make people change their behaviour?
Female: I would say congestion charge, definitely, but then you would have to have in place more park and ride schemes, a bigger, much bigger infrastructure. Definitely increasing car tax for cars emitting more pollutants. Why do you need a Range Rover if you live in the middle of town, that sort of thing I think. Not sure about toll roads necessarily but increased parking charges in urban areas I think that would be fine as long as there were more other options, like park and ride and that sort of thing.
Interviewer: And scenario three anything that you think would work, would be accepted by the public?
Female: I don’t think, the majority of those wouldn’t be accepted by the public, apart from I think it’s morally wrong to have a vehicle with a high polluting engine, you don’t need a 7 seater vehicle if you’ve got 2 children.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.
Female: No car days, one day a week is probably unachievable but a good idea, but is unachievable. 
Interviewer: Why do you think that?
Female: Simply because we haven’t go the public transport necessarily in Deben and you know it’s not convenient if you are visiting family or something on that particular day, you wouldn’t be able to get back or be restricted in time, that sort of thing. So I think that would probably be a possibility, but it would be a nice ideal but not achievable.
Interviewer: Okay. And restricting the number of cars per household is probably something that wouldn’t be able to change?
Female: No I wouldn’t think so, although, especially in Deben for example, when my daughter is older she may need a car to get to work and I might need, or we might need to share a car possibly, but I can see in some household that you would need to have a car each, but other houses you wouldn’t need to, so I think it’s up to the individuals to self police themselves on that.
Interviewer: Okay, thanks. Pretty much the same thing for now holiday travel. Do you want to keep that, I mean I can also take it, whatever you want? Unfortunately holiday travel, contributes a lot to carbon emissions and other environmental problems and we have a huge flexibilities by local airlines and things like that and people are already used to having their holidays, but in general I think that I am a little bit in agreement that something has to change and here again is a set of measures that could be introduced but won’t. Some are already existing, but we don’t want to force these things and not basing on your answers or something like that, so don’t hesitate to tell us I don’t want this, that’s why it’s rubbish, and especially in view of changing travel behaviour or maybe what would be, what would work for you, or whatever, so again scenario one includes, encourage carbon offsetting schemes, incentivised long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs, provide amply based schemes for promoting slower travel, by giving people more leave, or incentivise UK holidays, perhaps through tax break or not paying VAT for UK holidays. Scenario two again a little bit more radical, increased air passenger tax, a duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane and invest tax revenues into more high speed rail lines in the UK. And scenario three is just one point but a very comprehensive one. Provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, for instance flying, daily travel or energy used at home, they can undertake. That means that if you have a certain carbon budget and you want to fly around the world then you have to save carbon in other activities, you know reduce your carbon emissions for daily travel, or use less energy at home or something like that. Again what do you think of those things?
Female: Sorry, carbon offsetting schemes is a good thing, I think maybe airlines should be made to plough some of their profits back into that sort of thing. I don’t think necessarily the individual should be taxed on that. Incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs, that is, that would be the main thing for me, like travelling to London to see our friends, when it is just my husband going he takes the train because it’s about 50 to 60 pounds booking a ticket, but we personally couldn’t all afford to go by train, because that’s £200 for all of us to go, so we tend to drive which costs us about the 50 to 60 pounds to drive to London, so I think if maybe the travel costs on long distance were reduced then that would definitely be an incentive for me to use it and I am sure, they are running the train anyway they may as well reduce the price to get it full, than have it half empty running. I don’t know about employee based schemes promoting slower travel, by giving people more leave, these people will just go for longer holidays if that’s the case. And also that means that the employer is penalised for having a staff that work less time. UK holidays that is a fantastic idea, we looked into this last year, well this year actually, back in August, we went abroad actually because it would be cheaper for us to go abroad than it would to stay in this country. I think we looked at renting, we basically looked at a caravan, mobile home sort of thing, static home rather and that, you know for an extra £300 we could have all of gone abroad, depending on the cost by the time you take into account travel, the food, you know activities while you are there, so we had a week abroad for the same sort of money. To go in a hotel in this country, like you would abroad, you know would be double the price, so I think that is a really good idea, taking the VAT off tax breaks, or tax breaks for UK holidays.
Interviewer: Scenario two, anything you think interests you?
Female: I think anything you have got there is going to attack the customer, not the owners, running the airlines.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: And they will just make more profit, so I think the profit maybe needs to be taxed rather than, for the company, rather than passing the cost onto individuals, so they don’t make so much profit.
Interviewer: So you think it’s more the responsibility of the company to come up for, shall we say pay for environmental damage and things like that?
Female: Definitely, yes. 
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: Which they pay, they charge enough I think as it is I think on air tax and that sort of thing. Taxing passengers by the distance flown, whose going to manage that, it’s an awful lot of administration I think and the last one as well, carbon budget, the administration on that would be impossible to manage. A good idea but impossible to manage.
Interviewer: So you think this could be a good idea if you manage to control everything.
Female: If there was some way of doing it. If we lived in a big brother state then yes that would be easy to do, but at the moment there is no way that that could be managed.
Interviewer: Okay, thanks. A big terrain there. That brings me to my last couple of points. Okay here we are. When you think of local travel now, back to daily or local travel as we call it. Are you aware of things like car shared schemes, Car Share Deben?
Female: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you know how it works?
Female: Yes. You basically register on line and you get matched to someone or someone picks up your details of car sharing, that’s convenient for them and that’s a good idea, but I don’t think it is used enough.
Interviewer: Okay, would it work for you or are there reasons that it doesn’t work?
Female: No because I walk to work.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: But if I worked in Exeter then yes it certainly would be a good idea, or Tibetan even, that would be a really good idea.
Interviewer: Are there other trips where it would work? Let’s say if you have regular, maybe shopping is not a good idea, but can you think of anything, picking up some kids?
Female: Well school travel, that would be a good thing to do, if it was a mutual thing and not just one person doing it all the time, you would be a taxi service then basically. But I suppose you’ve got the issue then of safe guarding children and the potential for them to be left alone in a situation that maybe wouldn’t be for the best, you wouldn’t want a stranger or somebody you didn’t know picking your child up or taking them somewhere, necessarily, but I think being it probably to work as an adult would certainly consider doing that sort of thing.
Interviewer: And are you aware of car clubs, how they work?
Female: I know that certainly in some churches that’s what happens, not so much in Collumpton, but I know there is a church in Tibetan where they have like a 3 or 4 pool cars and you can use it for a week, I should imagine it’s something very similar to that, but…
Interviewer: Yes, I mean in bigger cities in Exeter there is a car club called Co Cars and they buy the car and insure it and are responsible for the maintenance and everything, and the good thing for the users is you don’t have to pay the full amount of money for the tax and insurance so up to a certain level of mileage per year, it’s cheaper to use a car club car than buying your own car. Do you see that this, and there is the advantage that obviously you don’t have private owned cars in front of your house, you have to go to certain point where you can pick up the car. Do you think, would that work for you?
Female: That wouldn’t work for me I don’t think, because you know I need a car when I need a car not when I think I might need a car so I may need to take my children to Tibetan hospital for example as an emergency and that wouldn’t be convenient then for me not to have a car.
Interviewer: Yes I see.
Female: That’s a long shot really and probably would never happen but…
Interviewer: So booking a reservation would be barrier for you to use it?
Female: Yes definitely.
Interviewer: Okay, very good. You are already approaching the last point on my list. I will simply read it out. Marketing changes in the future is the title. In the future there maybe changes in technology, such as electric cars, so that we can travel without producing the level of pollution we currently do. How do you think this will change your behaviour? Will this affect you?
Female: I think that in the future the government should encourage schemes where car manufacturers should be encouraged to build more environmentally friendly efficient cars, I don’t think it will happen because the government will loose a huge amount of revenue from what they would usually get in fuel tax and I also think that’s why the government are, for example, putting some money into smoking, or stopping people smoking but they wouldn’t be able to afford the huge revenue they get from cigarette sales and that would apply to the tax on the car fuel as well. So I am sure there are more efficient ways for fuelling cars but maybe aren’t being explored, maybe because the technology is not there, or the money is not there for the technology to be put into place, so I think there are some hidden agendas on the way.
Interviewer: So you think in general there are no general incentive for the government to reduce car travel, because they will lose tax?
Female: They are trying, they sort of half heartedly trying I think, but I think that is a lot of things as to why things aren’t being improved, because of the amount of car tax fuel they’ll lose.
Interviewer: Interesting. One last question. To get you to change your travel behaviour what are the key messages you need to hear from whom and what policies need to change? Relatively complex but….
Female: Yes, definitely more links, not rail links, more bus links, more affordable bus links as well, make it more affordable for everyone to change. Definitely a train station would change the way I travelled and it’s a cheaper way of moving around, rather than using the bus. I think there are many, many different things that need to be put into place before that happened, but certainly if that, if there was a train station in Collumpton, I would probably consider getting rid of my car, the second car.
Interviewer: Interesting. Do you think there could be some key messages that would make people change their travel behaviour and can you think of somebody who can deliver these messages or should it be or…?
Female: Gosh, I think it needs to start at sort of school age children, so I think definitely the schools need to be getting the message across and encouraging people not to drive and using public transport where possible, maybe a more frequent bus service around the town would be a good option as well, but that would be only if people using it, so I think school children need to get the message first, then the parents will follow eventually.
Interviewer: Interesting. Okay, thank you very much.
Female: Okay.