Name of speaker: Transcription
Interviewer: Okay lets start this should work now.  Again thanks a lot.
Female: Pleasure.
Interviewer: Our interview now is a follow up to our recent folks group meetings and the main idea is to get some ideas about peoples opinions about certain travel related measures and if that would work for them or not and yes that’s the main idea behind these in depths interviews.  Which shouldn’t need much more than 50 – 55 mins I should say.  So my first point on the list I want to ask you about is related to daily travel mostly, much of our research indicates that cost is a major factor in terms of peoples travel choices.  How does cost influence your own choices?
Female: Well because I am retired I don’t do a daily travel so it’s an as and when, and the reasons I travel are more important to me than a regular, you know having to get somewhere, so that’s why costs don’t, well I suppose costs influence me a bit but not majorly.
Interviewer: Okay, interesting, yes.  When we speak about daily travel that includes, try and think of everything you know.
Female: Going shopping, I mean it’s just, I would be influenced then by the fact that I can’t carry a load of shopping, so it’s more that sort of reason than a cost.  It’s not a going into work each day sort of thing.
Interviewer: Okay interesting.  That’s probably your car outside?
Female: That’s my car.
Interviewer: Do you feel car travel is cost efficient in general or, I mean you just said it’s not that important for you but maybe you feel….?
Female: Probably not but I suppose I factored it into my life.
Interviewer: Okay so it’s….
Female: It’s probably not cost efficient, I mean people when they give up cars say that, that they haven’t lost as much, because they have gained money to have an occasional taxi or whatever and they don’t have to pay for the cost of the car you know, the transport and the maintenance and repairs and things like that, so I imagine it’s not totally cost efficient.
Interviewer: I see thanks.  So if you compared your other means of transport, how does car travel rate alongside other forms of travel in cost terms for you?
Female: Well it would be very expensive because I have got a free bus pass so…
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: So therefore, the cost then to car travel is quite costly.
Interviewer: I see.  So obviously walking….
Female: And walking and cycling….
Interviewer: Much cheaper.
Female: Much cheaper sometimes!
Interviewer: Okay yes sometimes I mean it depends.  On the other hand we also found out that people value time saving by travelling.  Do you feel that car travel is a time efficient way of travelling?
Female: Yes.  Because if I do go out, I can do the shopping and go somewhere else at the same time and usually I don’t just do one thing I sort of do a set of, not jobs, but sort of tasks while I am out.  So yes I do find that time comes into it.
Interviewer: Okay.  That brings me straight to my second point on our list, already related to potential travel measures, including holidays, so if you can keep that in mind.  So we are now focusing on travel in general or transport related things.  Do you feel that we need to change the way we travel?  It’s a very general question.
Female: It is a very general question.
Interviewer: So take your time.
Female: I presume we will but I think there are an awful lot of issues, for example families are all scattered these days.  If I want to visit any of my family I have to travel.  And so it’s not just a cost issue and it’s not just a moral issue, well it is actually that we have to travel to, to you know keep up with the family as much as anything.  I have to travel as well if I am going shopping, I have to travel if I am going to, I belong to a church, I go into the church there and I have to travel and it’s not convenient on the bus and you know there are a lot of other things that are, that come into it and holidays, yes, yes we travel for holidays, I don’t know if that’s answered your question.
Interviewer: More or less.
Female: I tend to wonder I must admit.
Interviewer: Can bring you back to focal points, could you think of some reasons that could be there for in general changing travel behaviour?  Not you personally but in general, the society or other people, you included.  Reasons in general to change travel and transport related issues.
Female: Well certainly the over use of roads, because they are very crowded. The over dependence on cars but then you would have to sort of change the whole area that you live in so that you have, you know, the local shop and the local school and it’s the knock on effect, people choose schools these days, they don’t just go to the local one so there is a lot of commuting there.  At one time my husband had to travel from here to Grimsby every Monday morning and it was ridiculous that he was going across the country for a year when people in Grimsby could have done that job and you know, but it was just the way that the work situation was organised.  I have strayed from the point again, but that’s a couple of factors there.
Interviewer: You already mentioned one reason like congestion, crowded streets and problems relating from that and….
Female: And obviously the influence on the environment and the fuel, becoming shorter and the energy disappearing.
Interviewer: I see.
Female: I mean there are a lot of factors.
Interviewer: Yes.  That’s right and in view of…well let me start with a different thing.  The British Government just announced they want to reduce carbon emissions by 80% till the year 2015.  Do you see that reflect…or what is your view of current transport policy in view of that, do you see that reflected or do you think it’s not really well done or what do you think about transport policies in general in view of this?
Female: I think that the only way they can influence transport policies is to provide more, I mean I think you will get a lot more people going on buses when they have free bus passes and I don’t see why they can’t make local travel anyway a lot cheaper and a lot more user friendly as it were.  Just to avoid people using the buses, on the continent you get most people getting on buses and things and going that way, whereas here people are almost encouraged to take their cars to work I think.  I think it’s changing but, sorry that’s a little bit of your question isn’t it.
Interviewer: It’s quite okay, you have already brought up some things there like convenience and that we need suitable and convenient and reliable systems to force people to change travel behaviour.  We will come back to some….
Female: I don’t see what the government can do.  It’s this pack power thing, they can’t be unpopular because they want to be in power, but they have to do something, you know radical to change it.
Interviewer: Yes I know.
Female: Yes, like I say like cheap airlines, which I think are very destructive really, but on the other hand I have used them so I am a hypocrite!
Interviewer: Okay one last question in this second section.  Try to imagine, it’s always a little bit complicated because people are not quite sure what to think of it.  But if you wanted to change your own travel behaviour, how would you like to travel in an ideal world?  You know imagine, I don’t know maybe public transport that runs frequently, you don’t have to go to the other side of town to do some shopping or something like that, so in the ideal world would something change for you or would you want to change something?
Female: Well one thing has changed already in that, during the summer I have been cycling to the supermarket, not for the weekly shop, the big one, because I can’t carry it.  But at other times but that is because they have actually put in cycle lanes now which I can access and they are reasonably flat, because at my age I do not want to be going up and down steep hills and in among all the traffic.  So that has influenced me, but I think, what was the question again?
Interviewer: What would change your travel behaviour in an ideal world?
Female: Well I think it would have to be more convenient….I came from Milton Keynes here and each area there was built on a kilometre grid square with inside it there was the shop and the doctor and the local primary school and you know so you could actually access these things very conveniently.  And I think there would have to be a lot of environmental planning to do that.
Interviewer: So more integrated.
Female: More integrated yes.  That’s the word yes integrated!
Interviewer: Yes it’s just something that if you have to deal with these issues on a daily basis you keep these things in mind.  Okay that brings to me to another point, we developed a couple of scenarios including different matters and I want you to take a look at it, take your time and tell me if there is something that would work for you or would work in general you would think or if you find something that you think would absolutely not be able to do it and keep in mind on interviews these are just a collection of potential measures and they won’t be introduced in Exeter or somewhere else quite soon so tell us whatever you want and take your time and go through these things.  The right one is the daily travel, because we have the same for holiday travel a  bit later.  So just go through it and when you are ready let me know what you think.  
: 02-1411-LOY
Interviewer: So what do you think of these measures is there something that would work for you or others?
Female: I don’t use rail services very often but the bus service is I think, the frequency is important, they are fairly punctual and they are fairly reliable as far as I am concerned.  The smart ticketing I think is a good idea because you haven’t always got change and I do appreciate the free bus pass and I think that’s actually, I know they say that it costs a lot but I think in the end it will be cost effective by removing cars from the city centre.  There are many more cycling facilities now and I do appreciate that those are being put in quite frequently now which is good.  I don’t know about transport infrastructure I will leave that to somebody else.  And yes I do think that taxation for public transport measures is quite important.  Pay to drive.  There are complications with the parking charges because some people are, have to pay, perhaps have to use the car to commute so it’s difficult.  Fuel taxes, yes increase.  Car taxes probably that would be a good idea.  I don’t know about congestion charges really.  I don’t like the idea of toll roads, I think roads should be freely accessible.  To drive or to drive further.  I don’t think I have got an opinion about that at the moment.
Interviewer: That’s okay, that’s okay, just….
Female: It’s too complicated really at the moment.
Interviewer: Pick out some points if you want to.  So yes.
Female: Yes and any time there is an improvement in public transport then you have got to get it from tax revenue, you are going to get more people using it.
Interviewer: Yes that is just something that could result from these, from this     income or something like that.  So the last three or four points are more or less improvements resulting from these things.
Female: Yes.  Yes and if you are serious about taxes then you have to sort of provide the, you know the good results from them.
Interviewer: Yes to kind of reinvest.
Female: Yes, reinvestment.  I think you certainly want to ban vehicles with highly polluting engines.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: No car days, yes that reasonable, because it gets people started with car sharing or something like that. (3.15) I think that’s happening isn’t it really?
Interviewer: Yes in some cities you already have some pedestrianised service.
Female: Yes.  I don’t know how you could monitor.  You could put down restrictions on, because of people going in different directions to work, I don’t know.  
Interviewer: So that’s more complicated.
Female: Yes.
Interviewer: To try and tell people you already have one, two cars.  And the last again I think it would be a result of  (3.57)
Female: Yes okay, is that alright then?
Interviewer: Yes sure.  Just one thing coming back to no car days do you think this would work in general?
Female: I think people would object to it but I think, yes I think it would just make them think and make them realise that they can do it a different way and yes I don’t know how it works, whether it is just one area that is you don’t have cars that particular day or, I don’t understand the planning behind it, but yes I think it would focus people.
Interviewer: I think the main idea is just to encourage people to try it on one particular day and they can see they can get around.  I mean it was much more and people keep telling them that it would improve public transport services at least on that particular day, you know, to access, to keep things accessible.
Female: Certainly if they put more buses on that particular day, you know if you weren’t kept waiting at a bus stop for 20 mins in the rain then you would think of doing it again. Yes.
Interviewer: Okay, thanks.  That brings me to holiday travel now.
Female: Okay right.
Interviewer: Do you want to keep that or, I don’t mind I can take it with me.  I think just go through things at the same time.  So scenario one involves ‘encourage carbon offsetting’, do you know what that is?
Female: I technically know what it is but I don’t really understand it.
Interviewer: You calculate the amount CO2 that you use for your travel and then you pay for somebody to set it off and buy, planting trees or encouraging people to….
Female: I think that’s a get out to be honest.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: Get somebody else to do it.
Interviewer: Okay.  Probably first read it all through and then you tell me what you think is probably a good idea.  So ‘incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs’.
Female: I certainly think that would be important, yes.
Interviewer: And provide….
Female: ‘Employee bases schemes’, ‘promoting slower travel’ (6.09)  I think, I think that would be lovely but I don’t think it’s at all likely to give people more leave.
Interviewer: Somebody told us that some company already does just that and they say you can get one or two more days holiday if you can prove you didn’t use the car or a flight to go to a certain destination.
Female: I think that….well it’s not in the companies that I know anyway.
Interviewer: I don’t know what is the incentive for the company, I don’t know, but….
Female: I think they are very far sighted employees but I don’t think there is many of them.
Interviewer: Yes but normally that is one of the main things people keep telling you, that my time is so precious, especially my holiday time so they don’t want to travel a lot to the destination and so make as fast as possible.  Anyway, the last point on this…
Female: ‘UK holidays’.
Interviewer: Yes UK holidays and maybe to tax breaks for not people VAT on UK holidays to encourage people to spend their holidays here.  Do you think that could be an option?
Female: Well how does the VAT come into it?  Is that then a package do you mean or is in a hotel or….
Interviewer: Yes packages you don’t pay VAT on your overnight stay or on, even on your travel too, I don’t know it’s just one idea to make it cheaper for people to stay in the UK because that’s also another issue people keep telling you that it’s cheaper for them to fly to some Eastern or South European destination.
Female: But the hotels wouldn’t be able to make their living would they, I mean they are finding it difficult enough as it is.  
Interviewer: Yes.
Female: I mean I don’t think people take packages in the UK so it’s not that, so it would only be on the hotel bill or the cost of travel, which I think it would be difficult to provide tax payers for to be honest.
Interviewer: Yes the second scenarios a little bit more radical, includes increased air passenger tax, adding duty onto aviation fuel.  Whoever paid that would normally be…..
Female: I must admit I am morally against the cheap airlines and I think that in a way they become dangerous, because they cut corners so much, but yes I also wouldn’t want to pay an awful lot more but I don’t go on planes very often so.
Interviewer: Yes I mean the third point is pretty much close to that, tax passengers by the distance flown.
Female: Yes, probably is….
Interviewer: Looked over taxed if you are flying short distances.
Female: Yes that’s true
Interviewer: That’s another idea.  Yes the fourth point is ‘taxation based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane’ and the fifth one ‘invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK’.
Female: Where?
Interviewer: Just an idea, I don’t know.
Female: Yes I think it’s a lovely idea but I just, we are a bit crowded.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.
Female: Yes I think, certainly I think that more investment ought to be into the, to the high speed rail lines but, yes it’s also interrupts the rail lines when the works got to be done.  So, tax passengers by distance flown.  ‘Carbon restrictions’.
Interviewer: Yes that’s scenario three, including pro items carbon budget restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, including flying, daily travel, energy use at home, they can undertake.  That means if you have a carbon budget, that’s the main idea behind that.  You can use it for whatever you want, and if you want to make a long distance flights, you have to save carbon on other activities and maybe use other means of transport for your daily travel or use less energy at home.  So yes it could be on a per calendar basis or something like that so, there is some research, a scientists idea to come up with some more balanced ideas for measures.  What do you think of that?
Female: I just cannot see how it would be policed.
Interviewer: Ah I see.
Female: Put into practice and…
Interviewer: So again monitoring could be….
Female: I think monitoring would be…I mean I think you can raise the consciousness in people like in energy use and producing things to help but people that want to do lots of flying, they seem to do it anyway and…
Interviewer: If it was really being restricted and you had someway to, lets say monitor things and give people carbon budget for energy use at home, do you think they would adapt and change, lets say something, their behaviour?
Female: Yes I think people would if they could see how to do it.  Yes it’s the free will thing isn’t it, that comes into all this and the regulation of everything.  And I think, I think it’s a generational thing as well because….
Interviewer: A generation….
Female: A generational aspect to it to, because I think the older generation probably were brought up to do more moderation, you know cutting your coat according to your cloths type aspect, where I think there has been, and perhaps the middle generation which has got more used to being able to do anything and pay for it.  I think probably the younger generation now again are more responsible and more, you know thinking about the effects of their activities.  
Interviewer: Interesting.
Female: Is it?
Interviewer: Yes definitely, I mean it’s always interesting to hear different views and opinion so….
Female: I am not terribly sort of politically conscious of these things, but anyway that’s my thoughts.
Interviewer: Yes that’s perfect.  That already brings me to my I think it’s the second last point on my list.  Are you aware of services like, some services promoting local travel or being promoted locally including ‘car share Devon’ do you know of that?
Female: I know of it, yes.  I mean my son uses one in Bristol so you know I know how it works. 
Interviewer: Okay.  Would it work for you for any kind of travel, or the other way round, what barrier exists for you to use it?  You know how it works you pick up a person or give them a ride.
Female: I think that only works if you are going at a particular time in a particular direction and I tend to go in different directions at different times, because I am free to do it when I want to sort of thing.  So no I haven’t investigated it for that reason.
Interviewer: Okay.  Just one more thing.  Do you know ‘Co Cars’ that’s a local car club?
Female: Actually that’s what I meant about my son, I’m not…
Interviewer: Oh I see.
Female: Yes he’s part of a club, yes I do know about them.
Interviewer: So that involves having a couple of stations where you can pick up your car and use it and drive to, and it’s up to a certain mileage I think per year.  It’s more efficient to use a car club than owned car because of the shared fixed costs.
Female: Yes.
Interviewer: So if you think of that, would there be some way for you to use it?
Female: Yes that might be useful, my husband hasn’t retired yet, but he is due to so we are thinking of going to one car, although (15.23)
Interviewer: Yes that’s (15.27)
Female: I was thinking at that point I would be more interested.  Yes that’s silly isn’t it!
Interviewer: That’s human psychology.
Female: Yes it is isn’t it, yes.
Interviewer: Psycho logic effect, there are so many things involved.
Female: Of course there is, yes.
Interviewer: Really complicated.
Female: I was thinking that then I would use it because I wouldn’t have my car to go shopping.
Interviewer: It’s different from having your own car, it’s something that people….
Female: It’s difficult to give up.
Interviewer: Yes.
Female: It took me a long time to get cycling, yet once I did it I really enjoyed it and, mind you I was a fair weather cyclist.
Interviewer: Yes.
Female: But then it suddenly made me think, yes it was just a mind set really.
Interviewer: Yes I know what you mean.  Very interesting point.  Just one last issue.  If you think about changing your own behaviour, you can again take the wider perspective and talk about changing behaviour in general.  What are the key messages do you think people or you need to hear and from whom and probably what policies need to change, so could there be anybody you would think it would be worth if he or she says certain messages and addresses to people that would work and could that be and are there specific policies that need to change to bring people to change their travel behaviour?
Female: It would probably be financial, basically.  It was too expensive and if the rail alternative is offered then I think that would be the motivation.
Interviewer: Okay.
Female: I can’t understand how one particular journey is causing problems when you get everything else, when you get the lorries coming past with everything in them, it is very difficult to think of your impact really on the whole scheme.
Interviewer: I see.  So probably more….
Female: I am aware of the problems that the traffic causes but don’t really know how to you now take alternative measures I suppose.
Interviewer: Okay so that brings us back to convenience of the alternatives and…
Female: And the built environment as well.
Interviewer: Yes, again the educated planning and…
Female: Yes.
Interviewer: Structure that favours.  Okay great.
Female: Is that it?
Interviewer: Yes, thank you.