Name of speaker: Transcription
Interviewer: Okay that should be running now.  Yes as I say this interview is a follow up to our travel behaviour survey, from last year and we are much more interested now in peoples views and opinions on travel behaviour measures.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer : And how to, if and how to change people’s travel behaviour, by this I mean reasons for us to go into details into things.  Sorry the first point, I will go through my list and ask you a couple of questions and feel free to answer how you want.  First thing on the list is quite related to cost and financial aspects of travel and much of our research indicates that cost is a major factor influencing people’s travel choices.  How does cost influence your own choices, when it comes to daily travel I would say?
Male: I don’t think it has a significant affect on my day to day travel, obviously I’ve noticed a significant increase in the price of fuel, as everybody has and I have strong views about this, I believe that the public, the man in the street is being used by large corporations and also the government to capitalise on profits and I include the government in the profit making as they have got to fund things, but you know there seems to be a sort of a general trend to bleed the public as much as you can.  I believe if I had money invested in a big oil company I would be smiling all the way to the back, they talk about the rising price of the basic fuel, crude oil, but I believe there is a huge profit being made by the companies which wasn’t necessarily there before, I think they are cashing in on the options.  But I think the government is also taking full advantage of the situation to put the tax on fuel anyway, so we are paying a lot more tax than we perhaps realise.  I mean we have basic income tax which is fairly low compared to a lot of European countries, but of course I think the European countries are much more honest about where the tax goes.  Whereas there is a lot of, a lot of semi secretive taxing going on.  I have forgotten the terminology for it, but people are being taxed in certainly devious ways and I think probably I would be quite happy to pay more tax if I thought the government was being a bit more honest about where the money was going, but that can lead onto all sorts of other discussions about where the money is going.  But in terms of transport, getting back to your original question.  On a day to day basis I live with it because I don’t have a choice, but it has a significant impact on my bank account, which it didn’t used to have.
Interviewer: Yes, okay.  So in general do you feel, you are using a car quite often?
Male: I use a car….
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: Most days, albeit not long distance, but I have a commitment now to family, which takes me on the motorway, up to Bristol, a bit more than I would have done otherwise.  But no on a day to day basis I just, if I am working casually I will go down to Marsh Barton which is a 10 mile round trip and that’s about it really. 
Interviewer: So in terms, in financial terms how do you, or do you feel car travel is cost effective for you?
Male: Well it’s not cost effective if I had the time to use public, I am retired and therefore I have got a bus pass.
Interviewer: Ah that’s right yes.
Male: Which I am grateful for, not that I use it that much, but I think the convenience of cars out strip the sometimes inconvenience of public transport and I don’t feel in my car that I am tied to anybodies problem, expect my own.  I suppose if money was a bit tighter then I would probably more prone to making the effort to use public transport and it does require effort, you have got to plan ahead, you have got to change buses somewhere perhaps to get to where you want to go and it takes a lot longer, so if you are prepared to sacrifice time and inconvenience, then that’s fine, that’s okay, but generally there is a price to pay for convenience and that’s what I am paying.
Interviewer: So you think normally of course because of the free bus pass using public transport would be cheaper for you but you are willing to pay more for convenience reasons, for a car.
Male: Yes, if it’s convenience to use my bus pass I will.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: You know, my wife works part time and if I am home when I am not working, I do casual work say 5, 6, 8 days a month.  If I am home when I am working at home, then I write and I am a painter, so I am working from home and if I decide to go into town or to my gymnasium in town, then I jump on the bus, but if you know time is tight then I will jump in the car, you know as simply as that really.
Interviewer: That’s a good point and because many people also value time saving whilst travelling.  That would be my next question.  Do you think that car travel is a time efficient way of travelling?
Male: It is time efficient in comparison with public transport.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: Probably also with walking.
Male: Yes and obviously walking and cycling.  I am not sure about cycling actually.
Interviewer: Yes sometimes.
Male: I mean if you live up a hill like that, cycling is quite a challenge for those that have reached my age, but yes if I really was pushed again financially I would jump on a bike, you know and I would take more time or having said that I think leaving here in the morning to go where I occasionally work would probably get there almost as quick as I do in their car.  I have been retired out of the Army, not retired, but out of the Army since 1984 when I worked down on Marsh Barton and used to be able to go from here, or this estate, I had a different house then, to my office in Marsh Barton in about 10 to 12 minutes.  The same journey now 26 years on takes me 30 to 35 minutes so the traffic density in that quarter century is enormous, you know the change.  So, but if you are desperate to get to work or desperate to go somewhere and you can’t afford to wait for public transport, then you have to afford it, you know.
Interviewer: Okay I see. That brings me directly to my second topic on the list.  A very general question again and do you feel that we need to change the way we travel?
Male: I think there used to be more of a sort of national effort on looking at making public transport more accessible, more frequent, more, and cheaper.  I think we need to…it ought to be cheaper and as quick to travel by public transport as it does by car.  If that was the case then a lot of people would not use their cars.  I mean I talk to guys on and off for many years about this and they say well if there was bus from my house or somewhere locally that got me down into work in 20 minutes or whatever I would use it.  Especially if the price was right.  We have lived in this house since 1985, which is what 20, 20 odd years and the bus fare has probably gone up ten fold since we first came here.  And I suspect the fact that it has become privatised has some impact on that because you have share holders to satisfy and you have got owners who have aspirations about how wealthy they want to be and I think that probably should be considered.  If, when I was a child both on the rail and the roads was government controlled, government owned it was and obviously there was a price the government had to pay for that to subsidise it, but I see nothing wrong with national subsidy for public transport, provided it works, provided the transport is there when they want it.  I think if there is a tax implication for that on the public then I am sure if you, again it goes back to the business of honesty, you know the stealth taxes, if they did aware with stealth taxing and were more honest then people would say okay I don’t mind paying the extra penny in the pound if the public transport was available to me at a reasonable price.  So it sort of goes full circle almost, yes I think most people I have spoken to would be quite happy to use public transport, if it was a, cheaper and b, more convenient.  I think they are the 2 issues.
Interviewer: Okay.  What could be the reasons for a change in general travel behaviour or what might be there for changing travel behaviour in general, what can you think of?
Male: It’s almost like a sort of, it’s an ethos almost isn’t it, we have become slaves to our cars for the very simple reason that it is convenient, if we were, if you were able to make public transport convenient, I am not saying everybody would do it, because there is a world worship of the car, it’s no longer the nice thing that you take out on a Sunday, it’s your left leg, you know or your right arm, you can’t do with it, then the generations that follow me, they are so conditioned to use the car, that they don’t know how to use, it’s a bit like that old song, you know everyone’s gone to the moon, where everybody will be walking around with wheels one day, because they don’t need to use their legs and legs will disappear, people that are born without legs will have wheels.  And it’s all about convenience and people will actually push the cost of it.  So it all comes down to convenience I think.  If you could make public transport convenient then people...but I think there is more of a deep philosophy in this, that people have become conditioned now to accepting that the car is part of their life, you know and how you reverse that ethos I just don’t know.  I suppose if you did make public transport cheaper and more convenient then it would chip away at that ethos somewhat, but I don’t think it would change it, because I mean I am a bit of a grumpy old man but I have seen in society and transport is just an aspect of it, there is a general laziness in society now, people are, can’t be bothered, you know it’s and the whole thing it’s a vicious circle you know, people get lazier and lazier and then the business of public transport is something they don’t even consider because it’s not outside my front door, I don’t, you know I can’t just grab my keys and drive off.  So it’s about, it’s not just national it’s international, there is a laziness about the human race now, everything is so convenient.  It is what my grandfather used to call a have now society, you know he told me a story if you are happy to listen to the story?
Interviewer: Yes, sure.
Male: He told me a story when I was a little boy.  I lived in the village in Hampshire in the country and in a little shop about half a mile from where I lived there was a spinning top and a whip and wanted this more than anything, I had to have this, I was about 6, 5 or 6 and I had to have it and my grandfather said to me ‘Can you afford it boy?’ always called me boy, he said ‘Can you afford it?’ I said ‘Well I haven’t got any money’ he said ‘Well you can’t have it then can you’ he said ‘ when you can afford it, then you can have it’ and I think that probably the underlying problem that we have in society now, I think transport is just an aspect of that, to have in our society, if I haven’t got it I’ll borrow it to get it.  Which puts us in the condition we have got in in the world at the moment where all the banks are struggling because they have over leant and I think that is a reflection of transport as well, people have become so lazy that they can’t be bothered to wait at the bus stop, they’ll jump in the car and drive it away.  So the only way you can actually start to overcome that is to make it more convenient, make it cheaper.  Now whether they are prepared to pay as I do, prepared to pay the extra penny in the pound to tax is another issue.
Interviewer: We will come back to that.  Are there, can you think of other reasons for changes in travel behaviour?  You already mentioned that congestion is a huge problem, do you see other reasons why car travel for instance, you mentioned, car travel could be reduced, why this should happen?
Male: I wish I could come up with sort of definite answers to that question, but I think, I think it goes back to the same thing, I can’t, I don’t know of any particular feature in society that would make it less attractive and I think bumping up the price of fuel has made it less attractive in a very small way, but only for a short time and I think an example of that is about when the fuel crisis came along and the prices went up initially they had been fairly gentle in their rises and then all of a sudden there was a big rise and driving on the motorway, everybody was doing 65, 70, for about 6 weeks, 2 months and then they got used to the idea of paying more for their fuel and up went their speed again and now they are back on the old 85, 90 mile per hour thing, regardless to the cost of fuel.
Interviewer: I see what you mean.
Male: And I don’t, there is another aspect to it which is, which is counter reducing transport congestion and transport on the roads, is there, I suppose there has always been, but more of a sort of desire to say look at me I’m important, I’ve got a big car.  You know the 4 wheel drives that are coming onto the market now, everybody is making 4 wheel drives and when I was a boy the only 4 wheel drive was a Land Rover and, but now it is a status symbol to show people, Jo down the road that I am very important and I am something special because they have got a Range Rover, that type of, you know the Chelsea tractor syndrome.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: Now how you overcome that to achieve a reduction in traffic congestion and use of I just don’t know.  It may well need an international catastrophe of some kind, like a failure to find fuel, you know we are running out of fuel, well we know that anyway and I think probably the only time we ever seem to react as human beings, not just in this country but everywhere is when there is a major crisis and we all pull back from it and I don’t know whether, whether, I can only see that being the only way of actually ever stopping this sort of onward march towards the use of transport on the roads.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: I don’t know if that’s of any use.
Interviewer: No that’s really interesting and that really covers some of my issues already.  But I have to introduce another very general question for you.  What is your view of current transport policy?
Male: Policy in terms of what?
Interviewer: Let’s say governmental policies focusing on transport and do you feel that the government in general tries to encourage people to use different modes of transport or to change the travel behaviour?
Male: I don’t think the government wants to change the transport system particularly.  I think they want the tax revenue from fuel and I think if you reduced the, the amount of motor cars on the road, you would reduce the fuel tax to the government and therefore they would have to find another way of raising revenue, it’s a bit like the Shylark in Shakespeare, their money lenders, the government are money lenders, it gives you fuel, wants you to use fuel, but doesn’t want you to use fuel, they don’t want you to drive but they want money that you create by driving.  I am totally convinced about that, you know they will put up with traffic congestion because they know eventually that the public will get used to it, you know public will eventually be quite happy to sit for 4 hours on a motorway, you know whilst they sort out the mess because it’s like an applied psychology almost, the government applying a psychology almost, tell them in one breath that they don’t want them to use transport but to use public transport and don’t give them any incentive to do it so they come back to the car, so they come back to the car and the government says sorry about that but thank you because we’ve got a lot more tax revenue.
Interviewer: Interesting.  What do you think of, in view of this situation, the government announced they want to reduce carbon emissions till 2050 by 80% and this also includes travel and transport.  Do you see this reflected in current policies, I mean you said it’s probably not the main reason for political decisions at the moment?
Male: No I don’t think it is, I think they are playing lip service to it.  I am sure there are other ways to get people around without burning carbon fuels, eventually it will come through, but I don’t think it will come through enough to have an impact immediately, it may, I mean science will do it, as it’s always done over the centuries, it will change things to much, until such times that we can make drastic improvements in the way we actually move around, by using solar fuel, solar energy and all those sorts of things, in other words the natural energies, rather more than the, the natural energies that we dig up and burn.  I think if we could find a way of actually making a, an electric car that covered reasonable distance for instance and didn’t cost in terms of carbon fuel, then provided electricity isn’t produced with the use of carbon fuel, because you don’t get something for nothing, I think you will eventually actually reduce the carbon emissions, but that is only for Joe, you know you and I in our car, it doesn’t actually produce a result for things like aeroplanes, you know I don’t think we’ll ever be going on an electric aeroplane for instance, maybe one day we will, but I think you know we have to reduce, if we are going to reduce the carbon emissions we have to find a way to move around alternatively and if electric devices, as I said provided they are not burning fossil fuels to achieve electricity, then that might be a way to go, but it won’t fit everything.  But I think the motorist transport tends to take the blame for a lot of things that happening otherwise, transport gets blamed for carbon emissions, it is very bad, but there are other things as well that are producing more carbon emissions than motor cars.  I think we are talking about motor cars essentially because you know there are many, many more of those than anything else.  I mean this may well come up in your question later on, but when I was a young boy there was a lot of goods trains on the tracks and a lot of things went on goods trains, mail went on goods trains and was sorted out, was sorted on route, now I am not sure if that happens anymore, it may well do, not to the same extent.  But nowadays the roads are rammed with you know the big woofers and they are burning fuel, moving around for convenience again, much more conveniently than it was for trains, but you know if you could reduce the amount of commercial vehicles on the road, like an alternative method, like the old trains that carried a lot of stuff, then maybe that was the way to go, I don’t know.
Interviewer: Interesting.
Male: I wish I had some more definitive answers.
Interviewer: No that’s alright.  We are only asking for views and opinions you know, we are more on the scientific side and we have to evaluate what would work and what not, so that’s absolutely okay for me and really interesting.  Next step is, I am going to show you some, we call it scenarios, three scenarios, the first section is on daily travel, so travel to work, travel for shopping you know.  You don’t have to be afraid that these things will be introduced, these are measures and it’s just a collection of different measures, some more drastic, more radical, some are more soft policies and I want you to go through this.  I will read it out for you to it helps completely.  And tell me if you think, you can pick out single points, you don’t have to refer to the whole scenario, but you can pick out single things and say this would work and this would be a good idea and this would make people change their travel behaviour or you can also tell me if you think this would never work and this would definitely not be accepted.  Yes just give it to you and go through it with you.  
Male: Yes okay.
Interviewer: But as I say I will read it completely and then we can talk about the specific points.  Scenario one includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport, punctuality and reliability, use smart card ticketing, simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities is also one possible measure, major public transport infrastructure improvements or increased taxation to pay directly for public transport measures.  You already mentioned some of these things, so we can come back to that.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: Scenario two, increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars emitting more pollutants, congestion charges in most towns and cities and in a few cities we already have that, more toll roads or a scheme like paying to drive, where you pay more to drive further and pay more to drive in congested areas and the last point are more results, you know.  One result could be major improvements in public transport from these tax revenues, result and major improvements in public transport services, significant reduction in congestion on major roads or significant reduction in carbon emissions.  And scenario three would be for instance banning vehicles with highly polluting engines in general or introduction of no car days, maybe one day per week, full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones, in some cities you already have that.  Restrictions on the number of cars each household could own and results could be major and sustained decreases in traffic levels, a general switch over to public transport for it’s infrastructure or major reductions in carbon emissions.  So what do you think are there some measures or some things that would work, would force people to change travel behaviour?
Male: I shall sort of cruise through it if you like.
Interviewer: Yes sure.
Male: Increased frequency of bus and rail services, obviously that would, I believe that would have, eventually have an impact on and reduce the traffic density and congestion and use of fuel, without a doubt.  I won’t go into how they are going to achieve it.  Improvements in public transport, well without a doubt, I mean they go together.  I am not so sure smart card ticketing is particularly relevant, I mean it would be nice, it would be easy to do, but reduced fares are the major key factor in getting people to jump on a bus, or a train.
Interviewer: You already mentioned that, that’s right.
Male: Major improvements in cycling facilities, well to an extent I think probably in some cities and Exeter is an example, there has been an overreaction to the incentive to get people on the bike.  This council has spent a lot of money and is still spending a lot of money on cycle tracks.  Now in principal I have nothing against that at all, but if that were to make people use to cycle more, significantly more, then I would be the first to clap my hands and say that’s terrific, but my observations are that the cycle tracks around that are growing all the time are not being used, they are there, you see the odd bicycle and it comes down to, I understand the human being, the human being is basically a lazy thing.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: You know he won’t get on a bike.  A lot of people just can’t be bothered to get a bike out and cycle to work or cycle to the shops, and so what you are actually achieving is, you are producing a network of cycle facilities for the few who probably would have done it anyway, you may have, it may have encouraged a few more people to ride bikes, but I wonder just how many more bicycles are being sold than there were 5 years ago and you know you look at the cycle tracks, I look at the cycle tracks from my car and there is nobody using them, so, and I think it’s human nature to be basically very idle, very indolent and the car makes you so.  I mean when I was a young lad I did a paper round and I used to cycle 9 miles in the morning, I used to do a morning round and a small number of papers on a farm area and I used to come home at a night from school and do another 9 miles, so 18 miles a day on the bikes, there was no cars on the road, well there were a few cars obviously but the, I didn’t think about it I just did it and a lot of people did that on bicycles.  Now they are dealing with the choices, I didn’t have a choice, I just had a bike and that was it.  Now choices makes you, you take a soft option don’t you.  It’s like the gymnasium, you know you can go down the gym or work out, a lot of people will say oh I don’t think I will go tonight, I think I will watch television instead, it’s a basic human frailty and I think, getting back to the cycling facilities I think, I think laudable as they are I don’t think it is having the impact that it perhaps should have, because it’s about people.  Major public transport infrastructure improvements, well that’s a must anyway, I think as I said earlier the increased taxation to pay for public transport issues is fine, as long as it’s honest and upfront, you know I know in Sweden for instance they pay 40% tax, but you can see what you are getting for your money.  Increased charges, well I think they are high enough already, you know increased fuel taxes, well no they are taxing enough already.  Most of these things are, require more money and I think probably that scenario 2 is something that most people would not cope with, you know they feel that scenario 1 is improving facilities, scenario 2.  If it improved facilities significantly then as long as it’s honest and open, then to some effects you could live with.  
Interviewer: So you think it should be an integrated approach?
Male: Yes I think so, I don’t think you can just keep hammering away at people, taking more and more money off them to try and improve things, because the impact of taking money from people, these are the results achieved never fair.  Significant reduction on congestion on major roads, well let’s say you can build more and more roads but people fill them up.
Interviewer: Yes, that’s right.
Male: If you had built a 6 lane M25 it would still be full, so I don’t have any real answers to that one.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: I think there should be a reduction in carbon emissions, but that goes back to one of the early one, finding an easier way, way to drive vehicles.  Yes banning vehicles, I am not sure about banning them, but certainly taxing them higher, I think if you are boasting about how much money you have got, because you have got a damn great big car, then be prepared to pay for it.  And I do admire the, the use, I mean some cars are zero taxing now aren’t they?
Interviewer: Yes I think so.
Male: I think that is a good incentive, I mean over the years I have lots and lots of cars and I was a very keen car driver, but now I have come to the point where I think I have, think about economy a lot more than I did and I don’t drive as fiercely as I did, you know well I am getting older so I have got to be more cautious anyway, but you know I don’t, I don’t see the need to charge around so fast in a big vehicle.  Major and sustained decrease in traffic, I don’t know how you would achieve that without some unknown quantity to appear.
Interviewer: No.
Male: Yes I do agree with that, I think there needs to be, the whole of the nation needs to be, become more conscious of the fact that they should be proud of the reliability of the public infrastructure of public transport.  It should be something that we can look up to, say we have the best transport and we use it and it’s great.  But all the time you will be charged at high rates and the infrequency of it and unreliability and the fact that it is privately owned in a lot of cases, there shouldn’t be a profit incentive to run a public transport business and I mean it’s a classic example Stage Coach a private company, they are determined to make a profit, otherwise they wouldn’t exist, but I don’t think that’s the emphasis on public transport shouldn’t be controlled or manipulated by private company.  I sincerely believe that public transport should be nationalised, as it was years ago.
Interviewer: Yes, I know.
Male: Switch over (36.11) that comes back to that other one again.
Interviewer: Yes that brings us back.
Male: Is that, okay with that?
Interviewer: Yes sure.  Yes, just I want to give you another set because, you can keep it if you want?
Male: No that’s okay.
Interviewer: Because when it comes to environment problems, carbon emissions unfortunately holiday travel is also a contributor to these things, so we did the same in terms of holiday travel or my colleague did that. We have quite a similar set of potential measures, again nothing to be introduced immediately.  Some are already existing but just to get your view and opinion we are running through these things, again I will read it out completely and then we can go through it if you want to, scenario 1 on holiday travel, includes carbon off setting schemes, incentivised long distance rail travel, by reduced ticket costs, you already mentioned that in some way before, provide amply employee based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave for using slower travel means, incentivised UK holiday through perhaps through tax breaks or not paying VAT for UK holidays, that’s scenario 1.  Scenario 2, again a little bit more radical, increased air passenger tax, air duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown.  Tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane, also one idea.  Or invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK, could be one outcome of this whole scheme.  Scenario 3 is just one point but a very comprehensive one, provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities like flying, daily travel, energy used at home that they can undertake.  That means a family or a person will get a certain budget and if they want to fly to a holiday destination, then they have to save some carbon with other activities.  So probably reduce car travel or save energy or something like that.  That’s the main idea behind that.  So what do you think of those?
Male: Well I think certainly, I mean encourage carbon offsetting schemes, well yes I think without a doubt, there has got to be a way of doing that, but how you achieve it I don’t know!  I am not smart enough to work that one out.  Incentivise lone distance rail travel by reducing…yes I think if you are going a long way on the train it shouldn’t be as expensive as it is, distance in fact is, shouldn’t be the deciding factor on how much you pay.  Employee based schemes, I am not sure about that.  I think that’s a sort all a bit of a sop to encourage people to travel for companies, I think you know sort of people, no companies are so keen to get results and show profit that they probably would be promoting faster travel, by giving people less leave, you know.  It would be counter to most companies philosophy on how they run the company.  I think that would be very hard to employ, it would need a radical change to societies thinking.  Incentivise UK holidays through tax break….well the problem with, I mean UK holidays in itself is a problem that most modern people see as a fall back position almost, I can’t afford to go somewhere where the sun shines all the time, so I will go to a UK holiday, unfortunately that’s the best I can do.  So I suppose in some ways you could in fact, if you could find a way of making UK holidays more cost effective, I mean we were planning holidays recently and looking at UK holidays, given that most people want quite nice weather for their holidays, unless you are going skiing of course, but that’s a different thing.  But UK unfortunately is a place that doesn’t encourage holidays, other than from a cultural point of view and I think if you can find a way of actually encouraging people to think about holidays in a different way, in other words, instead of going somewhere that the sun shines and do all the nice things that people talk about, if you could find a way of reinventing the UK holiday so they became much more attractive, then I think your tax breaks could start to come in.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: I think it’s a fact that UK holidays is not a very attractive proposition.
Interviewer: I see, because of the weather mainly?
Male: I think that and the fact that, you know people, a lot of families go on UK holidays because they can’t afford to go abroad with the children, that sort of stuff, I mean I’ve been there, I have always lived abroad so it wasn’t the same for me, but a lot of UK holidays are not, if you had an option if you could afford it you wouldn’t go the UK, I think most families if they could afford to go somewhere like Barbados or Canary Islands or somewhere, they would go, if you give them 2 prices, you know, Torquay or Barbados, you know if it was the same price guess where they would all go! Barbados.  Well some would, there would be the odd ones for Torquay.  Yes if you could find a way of making UK holidays more attractive, perhaps by using tax breaks then that could possibly improve the number of people that holiday in the UK.  But there are a lot of issues there.
Interviewer: Of course yes.  (42.43)
Male: Scenario 2, increase air passenger….well it’s going up a lot anyway, I am not to sure.  I think what you are doing there is your restricting people by saying, we will stop you from going abroad, so you have got to go in the UK because you can’t afford to go abroad.  It’s just a tax barrier that, I mean if you lock those two together, those five questions together all they are saying is we are just going to increase the cost of travel to places far and wide.  I think probably that the high speed rail link is starting to go on now anyway, it’s gradually, not to sure.  Most high speed rail links in the UK are used by business people, so it comes down to price, if you can make…tying up with that long distance rail travel question up there, if you could make high speed rail links at the lower price then people would use them.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Citizens with carbon budgets, it’s a nice idea bit, and at least you can then decide how to organise your life.  Whether the average guy in the street would be able to manage that I don’t think he would, I think you are talking about a particular type of person who would manage that effectively.  I think if you were to try and introduce that I think you would find a lot of people wouldn’t manage it, couldn’t work it out, for 2 reasons, basically it requires a certain amount of effort and it goes back to that laziness thing and it requires a reasonable amount of intelligence to manage your carbon things.  I think those 2 issues alone would restrict the effectiveness of that.
Interviewer: Okay.  Maybe it could be an idea to provide a carbon manager or something like that.
Male: Yes.  Yes then you could pay him a lot of money and they can have a bonus!
Interviewer: Yes okay.  Yes that is something that people are already afraid of that some people will be able to buy their way out of it you know.
Male: I think we have enough managers at various levels now.  Managers, managing Managers.
Interviewer: Yes okay.  Two more points on my list.  Are you aware of, let’s come  back to local travel, you know the sort of schemes that try to encourage people to behave differently and do you know car sharing?
Male: Yes there are signs around, yes.
Interviewer: Is this something that would work for you or what are….?
Male: My particular scenario doesn’t fit with that.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Because if I was a full time worker and I was going to a particular place every day, 5 days a week, then I would endeavour to find someone who was going in the same direction and we would talk.  Car sharing requires interaction between people, you have got to talk to people, you have got to find out, who they are, what they are doing, where they are going, it’s social interaction that is required to make that work and I think one of the features that would delay it is that people don’t need to act very well in communities like I live in here, this is quite a nice community but it’s a social desert, we don’t talk to anybody, we have a nodding acquaintance with a few neighbours, but if you are in a village environment where my daughter lives, then you can go out in the village, knock on the doors and say hey Fred do you fancy sharing a car with me, it’s a much more personal thing, car sharing can only work that way, it’s a very, you’ve got to know someone, you don’t go up to a stranger and say are you going in my direction, it’s social interaction required to make that work.
Interviewer: Interesting, but you are right, you are absolutely right.
Male: I mean going back to how it doesn’t work, I mean modern estates like this one and lots of them around the City and in other places all over the country, people don’t interact as well as they used to, they are too busy indoors watching their televisions and doing the things like that.  This is why pubs are all closing, because interaction, social interaction is dying and car sharing can only survive on that.
Interviewer: That’s right.  Okay, thanks.  Do you know, are you aware of any particular car clubs, do you know how that works?
Male: No I don’t.
Interviewer: A club buys and owns a car and you can rent it even on a hourly basis and the big advantage is you don’t have to pay high fixed costs, you know, because you pay only a share of the fixed costs, that makes it even to a certain, up to a certain mileage per year, 8,000 miles per year, it is cheaper to use a car club than to buy and own a car.  
Male: In principle it’s a damn good idea, but again it does require, going back to the last question, it does require some certain amount of interaction.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.
Male: People have got to belong to the club and feel that they want to be.  I go to my gymnasium, I mean I have been going there for years and years and years and I know a lot of people casually, but I wouldn’t actually say to them, I don’t even know where they live, you know, there is several levels that you need to work at to actually achieve these things.  I mean car club is somewhat like car sharing, you know you need to be part of it to sort of…I think it’s a good idea, I mean…
Interviewer: Obviously there are certain limitations as you said, as you won’t have the car right in front of your house.
Male: No you’ve got to go and get it.
Interviewer: You have to book it in advance and all these things.
Male: It would have to be well planned.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.  You have to be in the right area of town for instance.  You have to, as you said there’s always the same problem if you don’t have a working reliable public transport system then you can only rely on a car more or less for certain things.  One last question, again a general one.  To achieve general travel behaviour change, what do you think could be the key messages, people or personally you need to hear, maybe from whom and what policies need to change?
Male: I think it comes back to our weak public transport system, that it’s convenient and that word convenient is so, so important in society these days.  Because the old story about finding the effort to do something, if you can make public transport effortless, that’s impossible, but…
Interviewer: Yes I know.
Male: But that direction, if the government could look at, I mean I am a staunch Conservative but I still believe in nationalisation and I think if the government could see a transport system that could be for the people cost effective and all the things we have already talked about, then I think that would be the key to reducing all these problems that are on the roads and making it more efficient, because people will join in, to be in club, you know the public transport would be the transport club and they will want to belong to it, you know.  You could buy an annual ticket, that sort of stuff and it wouldn’t, I mean if you tried to buy an annual ticket now, if you were unlike me I have got a bus pass, but if you were to buy an annual ticket, it would cost a fortune.  But if you could buy in and save money by buying an annual ticket, where you could go anywhere, anytime then that would, if the government could introduce a system like that, I think that would increase the use of public transport and people would be more, the inducement to use it would be there and they do some daft things, you know soppy things that are almost like child like in their reasoning and like using a bus pass anywhere in Britain, you know.  I would be quite happy to use my bus pass locally around Exeter, but going anywhere else why would I be allowed to use it somewhere else you know, I think that’s a step too far, I think bus passing is a laudable thing but I think it needs to be more localised, I mean people are travelling around this country now for nothing on their bus passes, which is totally unnecessary, it’s taking advantage of a system that is flawed, basically flawed.  Going down to town from your house is fine, that’s what a bus pass is for, or going down to the beach at Exmouth or something and you are retired, that’s fine, but to be able to jump on a bus and go to Dorchester and then get off the bus and get on another one and go to Portsmouth and then go to Dover for nothing is just not right, it’s unfair and the people that are carrying the load are the people that pay the taxes because most, a lot of bus pass people, I am not included mind you, aren’t paying high taxes, so one part of society is supporting the other part, but that’s another story.
Interviewer: That’s interesting, yes.  We get these views quite often to be honest.  Okay thank you very much.
Male: Well I hope it’s been of some benefit to you.
Interviewer: Yes definitely.