Name of speaker: Transcription
Interviewer: So thanks again for agreeing to take part in this interview.  In this interview we are focusing on, as I said travel and transport related measures.  We want people to think about their decisions how to travel and what influences their decisions and my last topic on the list focuses on some certain probably determinants for travel behaviour so let me start with the first question.  Much of our research indicates that cost is a major factor influencing peoples travel choices.  How does cost influence your own travel choices?  Is this a major factor for you?
Male: Yes it is.
Interviewer: Okay, so why?
Male: Why what?
Interviewer: Why is it important to you how much you…?
Male: Well if I am going to travel to, well for example I have just been up to London by train, if I travel for, well if I travel so that I am going to arrive before 9 o’clock it’s going to cost me about 3 times the price.  And if I don’t have to arrive before 9 then it’s much cheaper.  So why would I pay 3 times the price for something I don’t want.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.  Okay, that brings me to my next question and do you also use a car sometimes?
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you feel that car travel is cost effective?
Male: I think trains are better.
Interviewer: Okay.  Long distance train travel?
Male: Yes certainly long distance.  Well in terms of cost efficiency the longer you go, obviously it’s aircraft, then trains and then cars.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Actually no, aircraft, trains, buses and then cars in terms of efficiency.  But of course what actually happens is that the other three are collecting (2.02) and cars like the petrol.
Interviewer: Okay, so when it comes to daily travel how does car travel rate alongside other forms of travel in cost terms?
Male: Generally speaking I would use the car if I am going to go and purchase anything or do anything like that where I need to carry stuff and bring stuff back, otherwise I use my bike.
Interviewer: Okay.  And then are the costs effect the reason.
Male: Oh no it’s not to do with cost, it’s much more to do with…If I am using a bike, I am basically present, if I am using a car it’s rather like everything is one room because you are looking at it through a glass screen.  It’s as if these things aren’t generally there.
Interviewer: Right I see.  So in that case then costs maybe not the main major deterrent for your decision?
Male: Not for local travel, no.
Interviewer: Okay.  So it’s more the long distance when cost comes into it?
Male: Yes absolutely.
Interviewer: Okay.  We have also found out that people value time saving while travelling.  Do you feel that, especially car travel is a time efficient way of travelling?
Male: It varies, if I am travelling through Exeter certain times of the day then getting in the car is a very bad idea.  If I am travelling at other times of the day it is a very good idea.
Interviewer: I see, so is that important, again to determine your decisions what you take?
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: How long it takes?
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: So would you say that sometimes there are other means of transport that are more time efficient than the car?
Male: Well it varies, I mean just for example I travelled to places like Honington or Totness fairly regularly and I nearly always go by train if I can.  There are circumstances where I have to go by car and basically because the place I am going to visit isn’t actually, you know near to the station and I can’t necessarily access it.  So as I said the great thing about cars is being individual so you can go where you want at the speed that you want or the time that you want and you can take control of the whole thing, whereas with a car or a bus or a plane you are dependant on what the other person was doing.
Interviewer: That’s right. (4.30).  
Male: A to B.
Interviewer: Thank you.  Great that already brings me to my second block of questions.  I have a couple of, it’s not that we are finished too soon.  A very general question and if you were to tell me what you think.  Do you feel that we need to change the way we travel, when you look at holiday travel and daily travel in general?
Male: Well I think that, I was in London a few days ago and it’s absolutely jammed up with travel, now to be fare it’s a great deal less now then there used to be before they actually had the charges, but it’s still incredibly full.  So yes I think there would be, my preference would certainly to be to have much more public transport than incidents where you have to use the car.
Interviewer: So you already mentioned one reason that could be there to change travel behaviour, for instance congestion in Cities.  What reasons might there be, what other reasons might there be for changing travel behaviour, could you think of anything else?
Male: Well apart from environmentalism which is a basic it’s really to do with the Cities.  I think in a situation in which you have a large number of people living together, the less amount of individual transport of which you use the better the City will actually be.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Now having said which, you know if you happen to have, you know a wife and 3 small children for example is going to be very, very difficult to take them on bicycles, 2 small children is doable but 3 small children you are in trouble.  If you are going to go shopping with 3 small children, a wife, two bicycles and you are going to bring the stuff back then you are in real trouble, so you know cars, buses, trains are much more likely to rode.
Interviewer: Yes, for me that includes maybe two aspects, for instance something called a quality of life, that’s probably what you are referring to when you speak about Cities, on the other hand there are security and safety aspects related to that.  When you say you have to take big kids on a bike and this is also another issue.  Yes thank you very much.  The next very general question, what is your view of current transport policy?
Male: I don’t even know there is one.
Interviewer: Okay.  Do you think, why, why is that?
Male: Well okay if you really want to go down that route then I think that the privatisation of railway was an absolutely disaster and I think it needs, there is no single national way forward on trains, the same is largely true of buses.  Don’t think it necessarily applies to car, although perhaps it could do, should do.  And the development of non petrol based cars, just for example seems very unlikely to happen unless there is actually a government decision, now I don’t think that is actually going to happen.
Interviewer: Okay, so you generally don’t see a stringent transport policy going in this or that direction?
Male: Not that I am aware of.  I mean the basic problem would seem to be that there is an assumption that the open market is the way forward and the thing with an open market is that people will actually do things so they can make money irrespective of how responsible they are.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: And it’s rather like the difference between top down and bottom up, and I think to be realistic you actually have to have a combination of top down, bottom up and the local market you don’t have it.
Interviewer: Very interesting, yes.  The British government announced that they want to reduce the carbon emissions I think by 2050, by 80% or something like that.  Do you see that reflected in current policies?
Male: No.
Interviewer: Especially when you think of the transport and travel?
Male: Categorically not.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: I think it’s total bullshit!  I would like it to be true, but I don’t know how they are going to commit to doing it.  I mean anything with a long term strategy it is very difficult to have an emotional reaction to, or an emotional commitment to and I think the government are saying, you know they are just chicken boxes and oh yes, yes we are very nice people you can re-elect us because we are profaning that we are actually doing the right thing, I don’t believe a word of it. 
Interviewer: Okay.  So what do you think of certain….I mean there are obviously certain efforts to try to convince people to use cars less or whatever but do you not think that they really mean what they say or, or they really don’t give out incentives?
Male: Well it’s about their level of disparity between economics and climate change and economics tend to be regarded as a short term issue and climate change tends to be known as a long term issue and the assumption is that the economy is far more important than climate change and therefore they aren’t actually going to do what is required.  I think that there is something, and the second thing of course is people make money out of oil and coal and things and the government will actually make tax out of those things and they don’t actually, basically they don’t want to change, they don’t really like change at all, they pretend that they do but they don’t.
Interviewer: Thanks.
Male: Call me an old cynic!
Interviewer: No, no I think you, I can tell you, you are not the first one with this view on current policies.  I mean the main problem people have with that is that it is not really straightforward and you get mixed messages and you, they also think that losing tax income would be a big issue for the government and if they really want to force reduction of car travel that would cost them money.
Male: Yes indeed.  Although alternatively the, if the government took responsibility for developing a very, very, very low emission, ie. Nil emission car they would potentially be making enormous amounts of money.
Interviewer: Yes, probably yes.  
Male: I mean in exactly the same way if we are actually looking at offshore water based fuel, energy generation, the government would need to take responsibility of it, you can’t do it on the private sector you stupid buggers! And what are they doing, they are going oh yes……we will get up a nuclear base, why, oh well it’s because it’s something we already know.  If you did offshore energy, within something is actually effectively guaranteed black ties you have actually got a network which is oriented to the nuclear power stations, you can actually get rid of the nuclear power stations and you can actually put the energy directly into the network and it would be incredibly simple and incredibly quick and incredibly low emissions, virtually nil emissions and the government could potentially make a great deal of money out of doing it.  Is it going to happen? No way.
Interviewer: Okay.  
Male: Cynic.
Interviewer: No that’s okay.  An imaginary question, if you wanted to change you own travel behaviour, you already said, you were referring to public transport and you would be happy to use it more often than not.
Male: Indeed.
Interviewer: How would you like to travel in an ideal world?  You said you already use different means of transport and would it be the same, let me say, in terms of conditions for using public transport, maybe safety on bikes would be better and regular buses and maybe trams, I don’t know?
Male: Well I think a combination of public transport and private transport, I mean just for example I have a diesel car and I am running on bio diesel for the last sort of 5 years, and it works fine, it’s just very expensive and you know the commissions are comparably low but the carbon emissions to produce the recycled bio fuel themselves are actually comparably high.  I mean it’s still, I did the calculations and worked it all out and it still worked out a little bit lower but it’s a lot of hard work.  If I could actually get for example a series of reliable electric car, which I could park outside my house and….
Interviewer: Charge.
Male: Re charge, which I can’t do, then I would do that immediately, that would be the ideal situation from my perspective.  Equally if buses and trams and trains and indeed aircraft could actually have nil emissions or, you know, virtually no emissions then that would be a great combination, so my ideal situation would be to have bicycles, nil emission private cars and nil emission on public transport.
Interviewer: And then you would always try to use something….
Male: Well if they are all lower emission I am perfectly comfortable having a combination.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: Well you know in that I like buses, I like trams and I like train but basically I can’t always use them, because they’re not going where I want to.
Interviewer: Okay, so in that case you would need quite a flexibility or accessibility of public transport to use them more often or?
Male: I don’t think so necessarily, you know particularly with trains, it used to be back in the 50’s that you actually had trains veering all over the place, and because they were actually closed down for financial reasons, by the conservative government then, then what actually happens is people start to do buy a lot more cars and that’s had a very, very negative effect on the environment at the same time so that individuals, you don’t look positively about.  So you know I think it’s a combination.  
Interviewer: Thanks a lot.  Next topic, (15.56) developed a set of scenarios and I want you to go through it, I will read it out for you to give you some time and go through it with me.  You don’t have to be afraid that this will be introduced immediately or something like that, we are just collecting a couple of potential measures and ask you about your opinion, what you think could work, what would make people change  their own travel behaviour, maybe your own travel behaviour and what do you think would never work or would never be accepted or other difficulties.  So let me just go through it in a block.  Scenario 1 includes increased frequency of bus and rail services, improvements in public transport punctuality and reliability, new smart card ticketing and simpler and reduced fares, major improvements in cycling facilities, major public transport infrastructure improvements and increased taxation to pay directly for transport measures.  Scenario 2 increased parking charges in urban areas, increased fuel taxes, increased car taxes, particularly for cars emitting more pollutants, congestion charges in most towns and Cities, you already London we have something in place, more toll roads, paying to drive, paying more to drive further and more to drive in congested areas and the results and last few points are more or less results, major improvements in public transport from these tax revenues, result in major improvements in transport services and significant reduction in congestion on major roads and significant reduction in public transport services, significant reduction in carbon emissions.  And scenario 3, a little bit more radical, you see some more soft policies and some more radical approaches, banning vehicles with highly polluting engines, or maybe introducing no car days, maybe one day week, full or part pedestrianisation of urban centres with no drive zones, we already have that in some Cities, or maybe a restriction on the number of cars each household could own, although a little bit drastic, but it will work, I don’t know.  And the results could be major and sustained decreases in traffic levels, switch over to public transport infrastructure and major reductions in carbon emissions.  So if you look at these, what do you think?
Male: I think scenario 3 is probably the one that would actually work, with the exception of the restriction of the number of cars each household could own.  But I think the rest of it is quite viable and might actually work.  A lot of the other is, well it’s well intended but it isn’t actually, it isn’t going to stop people using high emission cars, I mean if you look outside, generally speaking the most frequent cars that you will actually see, or the most frequent vehicles you can see at the moment are the Land Rovers and very, very large engines, far larger than the necessary, they have become practical, they are very good in that respect but they are practical and the result of that has been that the carbon emissions, my guess is have increased enormously as a result.
Interviewer: It sounds to me that you think you need some pressure or some drastic measures to change peoples travel behaviour in general?
Male: I think so, yes.  I mean this is scenario 2, increase car taxes particularly for cars emitting more pollutants I think is a very good idea.  The only thing is basically if you happen to be incredibly rich why would you care, if you are medium rich then it becomes an aspiration to get rich enough that you can actually do carbon emissions.  If you are poor then basically, you know you’re going to be in a situation, you might be the person who actually, you know has 19 children, in which case it would be extremely useful for you to be able to have a large vehicle, but you can’t actually afford one.
Interviewer: Yes.
Male: So, I mean so much of the stuff is to do with the economics, it’s not necessarily to do with social responsibility, It’s not necessarily just to do with society, so the idea of banning vehicles for high pollution engines I think is a fantastic idea and I would vote for that, you know on day one.  No car days, yes I don’t think that’s an issue.  I wouldn’t necessarily include taxes within that, but again taxes which are low, low emission or nearly nil emission, I think no car days that would make very good sense indeed.  Full or part pedestrianisation of urban cities, absolutely.  Restriction the number of cars each household, maybe.  Major and sustained decrease in traffic levels, yes absolutely makes perfect sense.  I mean these other things, almost all of this actually works, you know increased frequency of bus and rail services, yes but I think people are unlikely to using their cars instead of bus or train, it isn’t necessarily going to make any difference.  It’s going to be a question of them, if you, start again.  If you live in a City, just for an example, or you live outside a City and you are actually going to go to a train station then how are you going to get there?  If there happens to be a bus, then that’s great and it’s very convenient and more often than not people use the bus.  If there doesn’t happen to be one that is actually local then you have a problem and you can’t necessarily have a bus that is going to happen, you know every 5 mins, so you’ll take your car or you’ll take your bike to get to the station.  If that makes sense.  Major improvements in cycling facilities, yes I think that makes very good sense, it’s a little bit like stopping people smoking, it’s become much more fashionable for people not to smoke than it was for them to smoke, not students of course!  But it’s, I was in Paris a little while ago and in Paris what actually happens for years and years and years everybody smokes and they eventually changed it, and basically it’s getting to a point now where the majority of people don’t smoke and that is an absolute shift, you know I think that it’s the case that in the United Kingdom as well that the majority, probably more people didn’t smoke than smoke and it’s taken a shift in peoples perception and I think it’s possible for this.
Interviewer: So that brings me to another point, public acceptance I think.
Male: Well it depends on whether people are collective individuals and I think that is the fundamental thing.  If you are an individual then you want to have a car so you can do what you want, a collective you don’t actually mind actually being in a bus.  But in my experience people actually have both aspects, so they will need to have individual transport as well as collective transport.
Interviewer: Yes, I mean in general it would probably a mixed approach including things from all three areas, you know.  Because for instance its hard to force people to use a car less if you don’t have a reliable public transport system, so it obviously must be an integrated approach.  Thanks a lot.
Male: Are we done?
Interviewer: Not exactly.  Do you want to keep that?
Male: No that’s fine.
Interviewer: Because we do the same for holiday travel.
Male: Okay.
Interviewer: Because unfortunately holiday travel also contributes to environment problems, especially CO2 emissions, so again don’t be afraid we want to introduce that we just asking for peoples opinions and whether it would work for them or for others and again go through it, you can pick up single points or you can say this would work or this would not work.  Okay, scenario 1, encourage carbon offsetting schemes already in place but maybe in a….
Male: Rubbish, don’t believe a word of them.
Interviewer: Okay, we will come back to that definitely.  Incentivise long distance rail travel by reduced ticket costs and provide amply based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave, when they use slower modes of transport.  Incentivise UK holidays, perhaps through tax breaks or not paying VAT for UK holidays.  Scenario 2 increase air passenger tax, add duty onto aviation fuel, tax passengers by the distance flown, tax air tickets based on the environmental performance of the aeroplane is another idea.  Or invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK, also one potential measure.  And scenario 3, just one point but a comprehensive one.  Provide citizens with carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities, for instance flying, daily travel, energy used at home they can undertake.  That means if somebody wants to fly to a distance far away they have to save carbon in other activities, so say reduce car travel or save more energy and so, so to introduce a limit to the amount of carbon you can emit.  So again your opinion on these things?
Male: Well I don’t believe in carbon offsetting schemes, mostly they talk about doing things like, there’s one in South America which is planting new trees as an offset, but the only thing of course is what they do is they cut them down and it is complete rubbish.  The idea is it’s a great way of making money, but it has absolutely no fact on carbon emissions.  In fact if anything it is more carbon emissions on this carbon offsetting, I think they are completely corrupt and I don’t believe a word of them.  Old cynic, yes.  
Interviewer: No.
Male: Incentivise long distance rail travel by reducing ticket cost, yes I agree but again if you go to Spain, just for example, the cost of rail is incredibly cheap compared to the UK, because the government actually takes responsibility for the costs and they don’t necessarily have, more so that they are profitable, they have them because they are actually for public support.  Not doing in the UK of course.  There you go that’s Thatcherism.  Provide employee based schemes for promoting slower travel by giving people more leave, that’s a nice idea but working on this option that people will necessarily take it up and I don’t believe a word of that, sorry.  Incentivise UK holidays, perhaps through tax breaks or not paying VAT for UK holidays, yes I think that is a very good idea indeed.  I think VAT is well dodgy, but I think that having people going on holiday locally does make sense indeed.  Okay increased air passenger tax, It’s very interesting actually, if you fly by, I was going to go out to (27.33) last month and there were like three options including going with British Airspace.
Interviewer: British Airways?
Male: British Airways.  Go with BA and alternatively flying to Germany on a local airline and the price for going with BA was something like 5 times as much, literally 5 times as much, so increased air passenger tax it wouldn’t have made a great deal of difference because you would only, in my experience, people who go on BA are nearly all business people and they are not actually personally paying, it is being paid by the companies.  Add duty onto aviation fuel, no I think fuel prices, they is a huge amount of that is to do with profitability for the individuals, no so it’s, well it’s certainly true one of the big investments that people have been making in the last 18 months is in oil particularly as they equity markets are going down, but fuel is very likely to be something which is likely to be sold no matter what and therefore as it decreases, if we have actually hit oil peak then what actually happens is the prices will go up, so it will be a better investment not a worse investment, which is observed.  Tax passengers by the distance flown, tax passengers by the distance flown, but again if they are actually companies it doesn’t make any difference. 
Interviewer: Yes I see.
Male: Tax payers tickets, based on the environmental performance of the aircraft, that I think does make very good sense.  Invest tax revenues into developing more high speed rail lines in the UK, yes but do they need to be high speed? Any particular reason why they need to be high speed?
Interviewer: I don’t know, maybe to make more, to get people from local travel, local air travel to onto trains.  I mean someone yesterday said it would be probably only be interesting for business travellers.
Male: Yes I think business travellers, I think that is very likely that that will actually be the case.  It may well be that there is an argument for saying develop businesses locally rather than actually requiring people to travel as much.  If they provide citizens with a carbon budgets, restricting the amount of carbon in terms of activities I think that is a very good idea.  That one does seem to be quite realistic.  The problem is all that will happen is that people will start to become corrupt and it would actually trade it so, and they would lie and there would be allsorts of corruption.
Interviewer: So you need a certain level of control or management…
Male: Well if it’s rather like, if everybody actually has a personal carbon budget what will actually happen is that it’s rather like saying here’s the maximum amount, not minimum amount, here’s the maximum amount so what will actually happen is that some people will trade and do things to make sure they can actually access other peoples carbon emissions, as a result of which carbon emissions will probably go up, because the number of that would be used in normal circumstances will be traded.
Interviewer: Interesting.
Male: Yes?
Interviewer: Yes there is always some models dealing with carbon certificate, trading certificates for carbon emissions.
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: So yes, I mean yes it could be an outcome.  Obviously the average carbon emission would be lower, without the trade.
Male: Yes I would expect so basically because if people can make money out of doing it, well it’s very much like these carbon offsetting schemes, the idea is good but the actuality is that people will make money out of it, they will actually trade them, then if they will trade them then basically what will happen is that they will make money and who gives a stuff about the long term.  I mean the fundamental issue really is if you are looking seriously to do this then what we need to do is to reduce the emissions which are coming from the vehicles.  It’s not so much about trying to control the people it’s actually about making them available and making them fashionable to have real emission.
Interviewer: More efficient cars, more efficient engines.
Male: Yes, it’s not more efficient it’s actually about radical change.
Interviewer: Okay.  A difference approach isn’t it.
Male: Yes absolutely.  Well I mean just for example, electric cars which can be powered by wind, water or solar energy.  Now I have to say there will be carbon emissions for building them but you are talking about something much, much, much lower than building an existing car and running it on petrol.  And what that would mean is that people have individual freedom as to using the car and you can actually make the same things available through buses and trains and trams and so forth, you know the potential (33.17) aircraft.  So people can actually continue to travel, it’s just that the emissions will be low and that will actually make it a much, much more effective way to order and easier to enrol.
Interviewer: Excellent.  Just 2 more things.
Male: It just requires quite a degree of radicalism.
Interviewer: Yes it has, it has.
Male: Which isn’t going to happen.
Interviewer: But maybe as you said peak oil is an issue related to that as people are forced to find different fuels or different engines.
Male: Well if we have actually hit oil peak then it may well be that this stuff actually generally needs to be done but, well they have been talking about offshore water energy for years and years and years and years, I mean literally 40 to 50 years and they keep not quite developing it.
Interviewer: Yes I see what you mean.  Okay as I said, just 2 more points, if I can come back to local travel.  Are you aware of something like car sharing, do you know Car Share Devon?
Male: Yes.
Interviewer: Do you think this could work for you or why it wouldn’t work for you or?
Male: It doesn’t work for me because I don’t do regular things, I don’t sort of travel into work, now I do know people who do car sharing and not Car Share Devon but they do travel together, they actually travel in from this area into the same place on a regular basis.  So I think it’s a very good idea.  (35.08) comparatively minority option in principle, but it’s basically like having a private bus.
Interviewer: Interesting, yes.  That brings me to my second thing.  Do you know how car clubs work?
Male: Car Clubs?
Interviewer: Yes.  That’s not a company, more a club and they buy the cars, insure the cars and are responsible for maintenance and you can rent the cars, either on an hourly basis or for days, that’s make car use cheaper and if you don’t use a car that much I think the upper limit is 8,000 miles per year.  Then it is cheaper to use a car club than to buy your own car because you split the fixed costs, you know.  
Male: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: But I mean the disadvantages to it are that you don’t have your own car right in front of the house, you have to go to a certain point to pick up the car, you have to book in advance, that makes it a little bit more inconvenient so to say.  Do you think something like that could work for you or would never work for you?
Male: It probably wouldn’t for me because I don’t, I can’t really predict when I am going to need to use the car.
Interviewer: Okay.  So you would need something with instant access?
Male: Yes pretty much. 
Interviewer: Okay.  Well is owning a car a big issue for you, I think the main restriction some people have said they have to have their own car because they pick their misses up….
Male: Oh that does come into it yes.  No I am not particularly concerned about owning my own car, yes if I have access to one all the time, that would be perfect.
Interviewer: Okay, thanks a lot.  Last question.  Really a general one again and to get you to change your travel behaviour what are the key messages you need to hear from whom maybe and policies need to change?
Male: Well the key message they need to hear is that travel has got nil carbon emission.
Interviewer: Okay.
Male: That’s it, and that the whole thing is changing and there will come a point let’s say in 5 years where, well okay look at it this way for example, you could only drive a vehicle in the UK which has nil carbon emissions as of 2015, that’s it bang! You are not allowed to drive a vehicle with carbon emissions as an absolute, so people would have to say that’s fantastic, got 5 years.
Interviewer: So you believe in government reinforcements of these things then people will have to change.
Male: Basically what happens is it’s an absolute, then what will happen is the industry actually put the time and money and the effort into developing alternatives, at the moment they have lots of time and they put all the money into developing what they have done at the moment.  There is no reason from their perspective, that they have to change, why would they change if they can actually make money out of doing what they are already doing.
Interviewer: Yes absolutely.
Male: Duh!  So if what happens is, is there an absolute rule that you cannot actually have a vehicle in the UK which has any carbon emissions within, by 2015, what will happen is the entire industry will start to develop and will change, they will and this will become something that is available for the public and the public will take it on.
Interviewer: Yes.  You know.  Sounds like a nice perspective.  But I am afraid that I think there are some barrier, you know that have to be overcome.  Yes as you said mainly in the interest of the government, it’s interesting tax income and….
Male: Well they will still be making tax, still be making income, apart from everything else, if you start to develop efficient, efficient vehicles in the UK, you could possibly even astonishingly enough export them.
Interviewer: Yes that’s right.  Maybe other aspects, yes.  Okay that’s it, thanks a lot.